<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>VIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-8" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup><h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</h2><h3 epub:type="title">YAHCOB BUNK</h3></hgroup>

<p>Before retiring, Dennis as usual took his Bible from his trunk to read
a chapter. He was now in a very different mood from that of a few hours
ago. The suggestion of his bar-room acquaintance was a light upon his
way. And with one of Dennis's age and temperament, even a small hope
is potent. He was eager for the coming day, in order to try the
experiment of wringing bread and opportunity for further search out
of the wintry snows.</p>

<p>But that which had done him the most good—more than he realized—was
the kindness he had received, rough though it was—the sympathy and
companionship of another human being; for if he had been cast away on
a desert island he could not have been more isolated than in the great
city, with its indifferent multitudes.</p>

<p>Moreover the generous supper was not without its decided influence;
and with it he had drunk a cup of good coffee, that nectar of the gods,
whose subtile, delicate influence is felt in body and brain, in every
fibre of the nature not deadened and blunted by stronger and coarser
stimulants. He who leaves out physical causes in accounting for mental
and moral states, will usually come wide of the mark. But while giving
the influences above referred to their due force, so far from ignoring,
we would acknowledge with emphasis, the chief cause of man's ability
to receive and appreciate all the highest phases of truth and good,
namely, God's help asked for and given. Prayer was a habit with Dennis.
He asked God with childlike faith for the bestowment of every Christian
grace, and those who knew him best saw that he had no reason to
complain that his prayers were unanswered.</p>

<p>But now, at a time when he would most appreciate it, God was about to
reveal to him a truth that would be a rich source of help and comfort
through life, and a sudden burst of sunshine upon his dark way at the
present hour. He was to be shown how he might look to heaven for help
and guidance in respect to his present and earthly interests, as truly
as in his spiritual life.</p>

<p>As he opened his Bible his eyes caught the words of our Lord—"Launch
out into the deep and let down your nets for a draught."</p>

<p>Then Peter's answer—"Master, we have toiled all the night and have
taken nothing: nevertheless, at Thy word I will let down the net."</p>

<p>The result—"They inclosed a great multitude of fishes."</p>

<p>With these words light broke in upon his mind. "If our Lord," he mused,
"helped His first disciples catch fish, why should He not help me find
a good place?" Then unbelief suggested, "It was not for the sake of
the fish; they were only means to a higher end."</p>

<p>But Dennis, who had plenty of good common-sense, at once answered
this objection: "Neither do I want position and money for low, selfish
purposes. My ends are the best and purest, for I am seeking my own
honest living and the support of my mother and sisters—the very
imperative duties that God is now imposing on me. Would God reveal a
duty and no way of performing it?"</p>

<p>Then came the thought: "Have I asked Him to help me? Have I not been
seeking in my own wisdom, and trusting in my own strength? and this
too when my ignorance of business, the dull season of the year, and
everything was against me, when I specially needed help. Little wonder
that I have fared as I have."</p>

<p>Turning the leaves of his Bible rapidly, he began searching for
instances of God's interference in behalf of the temporal interests
of His servants—for passages where earthly prosperity was promised
or given. After an hour he closed the Bible with a long breath of
wonder, and said to himself "Why, God seems to care as much for the
well-being and happiness of his children here as He will when He has
us all about Him in the home above. I've been blind for twenty-one
years to one of the grandest truths of this Book."</p>

<p>Then, as the thought grew upon him, he exclaimed, joyously, "Take
heart, Dennis Fleet: God is on your side in the struggle for an honest
success in this life as truly as in your fight against sin and the
devil."</p>

<p>It was long before he slept that night, but a truth had been revealed
that rested and strengthened him more than the heavy slumbers after
the weary days that had preceded.</p>

<p>The dawn of the winter morning was cold and faint when Dennis appeared
in the bar-room the next day. The jolly-faced Teuton was making the
fire, stopping often to blow his cold fingers, and wasting enough good
breath to have kindled a furnace. His rubicund visage, surrounded by
shaggy hair and beard of yellow, here appeared in the dust and smoke
he was making like the sun rising in a fog.</p>

<p>"Hillo!" he said, on seeing Dennis; "vat you oop dis early for? Don't
vant anoder dinner yet, I hope?"</p>

<p>"I will take that in good time," said Dennis; "and shall want a bigger
one than that which so astonished you at first."</p>

<p>"Oh, my eyes!" said the German; "den I go and tell de cook to pegin to
get him right avay."</p>

<p>Laughing good-naturedly, Dennis went to the door and looked out.  On
sidewalk and street the snow lay six or eight inches deep, untrodden,
white and spotless, even in the heart of the great city.  "How different
this snow will look by night," thought he; "how soiled and black!
Perhaps very many come to this city in the morning of life like this
snow, pure and unstained; but after being here awhile they become like
this snow when it has been tossed about and trodden under every careless
foot. God grant that, however poor and unsuccessful I may remain, such
pollution may never be my fate."</p>

<p>But feeling that he had no time for moralizing if he would secure bread
for the coming day of rest, he turned and said to the factotum of the
bar-room, "How much will you give to have the snow cleared off the
sidewalk in front of your house?"</p>

<p>"Zwei shillen."</p>

<p>"Then I will earn my breakfast before I eat it, if you will lend me
a shovel."</p>

<p>"I dought you vas a shentlemans," said the German, staring at him.</p>

<p>"So I am; just the shentlemans that will clean off your sidewalk for
zwei shillen, if you will let him."</p>

<p>"You vant to do him for exercise?"</p>

<p>"No; for zwei shillings."</p>

<p>"I dought you vas a shentlemans," said the man, still staring in stolid
wonder at Dennis.</p>

<p>"Didn't you ever know of a gentleman who came from Germany to this
country and was glad to do anything for an honest living?"</p>

<p>"Often and often I haf. You see von here," said the man, with a grin.
"Well, I am just that kind of a gentleman. Now if you will lend me a
shovel I will clean off your sidewalk for two shillings, and be a great
deal more thankful than if you had given me the money for nothing."
"Little fear of dot," said the man, with another grin. "Vel, you are
der queerest Yankee in Chicago, you are; I dink you are 'bout haf
Sherman. I tells you vat—here, vat's your name?—if you glean off dot
sidewalk goot, you shall haf preakfast and dinner, much as you eat,
vidout von shent to pay. I don't care if der cook is cooking all day.
I like your—vat you call him?—shpunk."</p>

<p>"It's a bargain," said Dennis; "and if I can make a few more like it
to-day, I shall be rich."</p>

<p>"You may vel say dot. I vill go into der market and see if dere's
enough for me to keep my bart of der bargain goot."</p>

<p>For half an hour Dennis worked away lustily, and then called his
task-master and said, "Will you accept the job?"</p>

<p>Surveying with surprise the large space cleared, and looking in vain
for reason to find fault, he said: "I say nothin' agin him. I hope you
vill eat your dinner as quick. Now come in to your preakfast."</p>

<p>He pretended to be perfectly aghast at Dennis's onslaught on the
buckwheat cakes, and rolled up his eyes despairingly as each new plate
was emptied.</p>

<p>Having finished, Dennis gave him a nod, and said, "Wait till
dinner-time."</p>

<p>"Ah! dere vill be von famine," said the German, in a tone of anguish,
wringing his hands.</p>

<p>Having procured the needful implement, Dennis started out, and, though
there was considerable competition, found plenty to do, and shovelled
away with little cessation till one o'clock. Then, counting his gains,
he found that he had paid for his shovel, secured breakfast and dinner,
and had a balance on hand of two dollars and fifty cents, and he had
nearly half a day yet before him. He felt rich—nay, more than that,
he felt like a man who, sinking in a shoreless ocean, suddenly catches
a plank that bears him up until land appears in the distance.</p>

<p>"This is what comes of asking God to help a fellow," said he to himself.
"Strange, too, that He should answer my prayer in part before I asked,
by causing that queer jumble of good and evil, Bill Cronk, to suggest
to me this way of turning an honest penny. I wish Bill was as good a
friend to himself as he is to others. I fear that he will go to the
dogs. Bless me! the gnawings of hunger are bad enough, but what must
be those of conscience? I think I can astonish my German friend to-day
as never before;" and, shouldering his shovel, he walked back to dinner,
feeling like a prince bearing aloft the insignia of his power.</p>

<p>When he entered the bar and lunch room, he saw that something was
wrong. The landlord met him, instead of his jolly, satirical friend.</p>

<p>Now the owner of the place was a wizen-faced, dried-up old anatomy,
who seemed utterly exhaling away in tobacco smoke, while his assistant
was becoming spherical under the expansive power of lager. It was his
custom to sit up and smoke most of the night, and therefore he was
down late in the morning. When he appeared his assistant told him of
the bargain he had made with Dennis as a good joke. But old Hans hadn't
any faculty for jokes. Dollars and cents and his big meerschaum made
up the two elements of his life. The thought of losing zwei shillings
or zwei cents by Dennis, or any one else, caused him anguish, and
instead of laughing, his fun-loving assistant was aghast at seeing him
fall into a passion.</p>

<p>"You be von big fule. Vat for we keep mens here who haf no money? You
should gleared him off, instead of making pargains for him to eat us
out of der house."</p>

<p>"We haf his trunk," said Jacob, for that was his name.</p>

<p>"Nothin' in it," growled Hans, yet somewhat mollified by this fact.
When Dennis appeared, he put the case without any circumlocution: "I
makes my livin' by keepin' dis house. I can no make my livin' unless
efrypodies bays me. I haf reason to dink dot you haf no moneys. Vat
ish de druf? 'Gause if you haf none, you can no longer stay here."</p>

<p>"Have I not paid for everything I have had so far?" said Dennis.</p>

<p>"Dot is not der question. Haf you got any moneys?"</p>

<p>"What is your bill in advance up to Monday morning?"</p>

<p>"Zwei dollar and a quarter, if you dake preakfast."<br/>

"Deduct breakfast and dinner to-day for clearing off the sidewalk."<br/>
</p>

<p>"Dot ish too much; you did it in half-hour."</p>

<p>"Well, it would have taken you three. But a bargain is a bargain, the
world over. Did not you promise it?"—to Jacob.</p>

<p>"Yah! und you shall haf him, too, if I be der loser. Yahcob Bunk ish
not der man to go pack on his vort."</p>

<p>"Vel, den," said old Hans, "von dollar sheventy-five to Monday morning."</p>

<p>"There's the money; now let me have my dinner, for I am in a hurry."</p>

<p>At the sight of money Hans at once became the most obsequious of hosts,
and so would remain while it lasted. But Dennis saw that the moment
it was gone his purchased courtesy would change, and he trembled at
his narrow escape from being thrust out into the wintry streets,
friendless, penniless, to beg or starve—equally hard alternatives to
his mind.</p>

<p>"Come, Yahcob, thou snail, give der shentlemans his dinner," said Hans.</p>

<p>Jacob, who had been looking on with heavy, stolid face, now brightened
up on seeing that all was right, and gave Dennis a double portion of
the steaming pot-pie, and a huge mug of coffee. When Dennis had finished
these and crowned his repast with a big dumpling, Jacob came to him
with a face as long and serious as his harvest moon of a visage could
be made, and said: "Dere ish nodding more in Chicago; you haf gleaned
it out. Ve must vait dill der evenin' drain gomes pefore ve haf supper."</p>

<p>"That will be time enough for me," said Dennis, laughing—for he could
laugh to-day at little things—and started off again with his shovel.</p>

		</section>
	</body>
</html>
