<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XV: Promoted</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-15" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Promoted</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Late in the afternoon of the same day (which was Saturday), as <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ludolph was passing out of the store on his way home, he noticed the table that he had arranged artistically some little time before as a lesson to his clerks. Gradually it had fallen back into its old straight lines and rigid appearance. He seemed greatly annoyed.</p>
			<p>“What is the use of rearranging the store?” he muttered. “They will have it all back again on the general principle of a ramrod in a little while. But we have put our hands to this work, and it shall be carried through, even if I discharge half of these wooden-heads.”</p>
			<p>Then calling the clerk in charge, he said, “Look here, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Berder, I grouped the articles on this counter for you once, did I not?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, sir.”</p>
			<p>“Let me find them Monday morning just as I arranged them on that occasion.”</p>
			<p>The young man looked as blank and dismayed as if he had been ordered to swallow them all before Monday morning.</p>
			<p>He went to work and jumbled them up as if that were grouping them, and then asked one or two of the other clerks what they thought of it. They shook their heads, and said it looked worse than before.</p>
			<p>“I vill study over him all day tomorrow, and den vill come early Monday and fix him;” and the perplexed youth took himself off.</p>
			<p>Dennis felt almost sure that he could arrange it as <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ludolph had done, or with something of the same effect, but did not like to offer his services, not knowing how they would be received, for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Berder had taken special delight in snubbing him.</p>
			<p>After the duties of the store were over, Dennis wrote to his mother a warm, bright, filial letter, portraying the scene of the day in its comic light, making all manner of fun of himself, that he might hide the fact that he had suffered. But he did not hide it, as a return letter proved, for it was full of sympathy and indignation that <em>her</em> son should be so treated, but also full of praise for his Christian manliness and patience.</p>
			<p>“And now, my son,” she wrote, “let me tell you of at least two results of your steady, faithful performance of your present humble duties. The money you send so regularly is more than sufficient for our simple wants. We have every comfort, and I am laying something by for sickness and trouble, for both are pretty sure to come before long in this world. In the second place, you have given me that which is far better than money⁠—comfort and strength. I feel more and more that we can lean upon you as our earthly support, and not find you a ‘broken reed.’ While so many sons are breaking their mothers’ hearts, you are filling mine with hope and joy. I am no prophetess, my son, but from the sure word of God I predict for you much happiness and prosperity for thus cheering and providing for your widowed mother. Mark my words. God has tried you and not found you wanting. He will soon give you better work to do⁠—work more in keeping with your character and ability.”</p>
			<p>This prediction was fulfilled before Dennis received the letter containing it, and it happened on this wise.</p>
			<p>Early on Monday morning <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Berder appeared and attempted the hopeless task of grouping the articles on his table in accordance with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ludolph’s orders. After an hour’s work he exclaimed in despair, “I cannot do him to save my life.”</p>
			<p>Dennis at a distance, with a half-amused, half-pitying face, had watched <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Berder’s wonderful combinations, and when Rip Van Winkle was placed between two togated Roman senators, and Ichabod Crane arranged as if making love to a Greek goddess, he came near laughing outright. But when <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Berder spoke he approached and said, kindly and respectfully, “Will you let me try to help you?”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Berder; “you cannot make dings vorse.” Acting upon this ungracious permission, Dennis folded his arms and studied the table for five minutes.</p>
			<p>“Come,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Berder, “standing dere and looking so vise as an owl von’t help matters. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ludolph vill be here soon.”</p>
			<p>“I am not losing time,” said Dennis; and a moment proved he was not, for, having formed a general plan of arrangement, he went rapidly to work, and in a quarter of an hour could challenge <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ludolph or any other critic to find serious fault.</p>
			<p>“There! I could do better if I had more time, but I must go to my sweeping and dusting, or <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Schwartz will be down on me, and he is pretty heavy, you know. I never saw such a man⁠—he can see a grain of dust half across the store.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Berder had looked at Dennis’s quick, skilful motions in blank amazement, and then broke out into an unwonted panegyric for him: “I say, Vleet, dot’s capital! Where you learn him?” Then in a paroxysm of generosity he added, “Dere’s a quarter for you.”</p>
			<p>“No, I thank you,” said Dennis, “I did not do it for money.”</p>
			<p>“Vat did der fool do it for, den, I’d like to know?” muttered <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Berder, the philosophy of bid life resuming its former control. “Saved a quarter, anyhow, and, vat’s more, know vere to go next dime der old man comes down on me.”</p>
			<p>A little after nine <abbr>Mr.</abbr> and Miss Ludolph came in, and paused at the table. Dennis, unnoticed, stood behind Benjamin Franklin and Joan of Arc, placed lovingly together on another counter, face to face, as if in mutual admiration, and from his hiding-place watched the scene before him with intense anxiety. One thought only filled his mind⁠—Would they approve or condemn his taste? for he had arranged the table on a plan of his own. His heart gave a glad bound when <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ludolph said: “Why, Berder, this is excellent. To be sure you have taken your own method, and followed your own taste, but I find no fault with that, when you produce an effect like this.”</p>
			<p>“I declare, father,” chimed in Miss Ludolph, “this table pleases me greatly. It is a little oasis in this great desert of a store. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Berder, I compliment you on your taste. You shall help me rearrange, artistically, everything in the building.”</p>
			<p>Dennis, in his agitation, came near precipitating Benjamin Franklin into the arms of Joan of Arc, a position scarcely in keeping with either character.</p>
			<p>“Yes, Christine, that is true,” continued <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ludolph, “<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Berder will be just the one to help you, and I am glad you have found one competent. By all the furies! just compare this table with the one next to it, where the Past, Present, and Future have not the slightest regard for each other, and satyrs and angels, philosophers and bandits, are mixed up about as closely as in real life. Here, Berder, try you hand at this counter also; and you, young men, gather round and see the difference when <em>art</em>, instead of mathematics, rules the world of art. If this thing goes on, we shall have the golden age back again in the store.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Berder, though somewhat confused, had received all his compliments with bows and smiles. But Dennis, after his thrill of joy at having pleased <abbr>Mr.</abbr> and Miss Ludolph’s fastidious taste, felt himself reddening with honest indignation that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Berder should carry off all his laurels before his face. But he resolved to say nothing, knowing that time would right him. When <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ludolph asked the young men to step forward, he came with the others.</p>
			<p>“That’s right, Fleet,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ludolph, again, “you can get a useful hint, too, like enough.”</p>
			<p>“Nonsense, father,” said Miss Ludolph, in a tone not so low but that Dennis heard it; “why spoil a good sweeper and duster by putting uppish notions in his head? He keeps the store cleaner than any man you ever had, and I don’t soil my dresses as I used to.”</p>
			<p>Dennis’s color heightened a little, and his lips closed more firmly, but he gave no other sign that he heard this limitation of his hope and ambition. But it cut him rather deep. The best he could ever do, then, in her view, was to keep her dresses from being soiled.</p>
			<p>In the meantime <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Berder had shown great embarrassment at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ludolph’s unexpected request. After a few moments of awkward hesitation he stammered out that he could do it better alone. The suspicion of keen <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ludolph was at once aroused and he persisted: “Oh, come, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Berder, we don’t expect you to do your best in a moment, but a person of your taste can certainly make a great change for the better in the table before you.”</p>
			<p>In sheer desperation the entrapped youth attempted the task, but he had not bungled five minutes before <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ludolph said, sharply, “<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Berder, you did not arrange this table.”</p>
			<p>“Vell,” whined <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Berder, “I didn’t say dot I did.”</p>
			<p>“You caused me to believe that you did,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ludolph, his brow growing dark. “Now, one question, and I wish the truth: Who did arrange this table?”</p>
			<p>“Vleet, dere, helped me,” gasped <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Berder.</p>
			<p>“<em>Helped</em> you? <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fleet, step forward, if you please, for I intend to have the truth of this matter. How much help did <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Berder give you in arranging this table?”</p>
			<p>“None, sir,” said Dennis, looking straight into <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ludolph’s eyes.</p>
			<p>All looked with great surprise at Dennis, especially Miss Ludolph, who regarded him most curiously. “How different he appears from Pat Murphy!” she again thought.</p>
			<p>“Someone has told a lie, now,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ludolph, sternly. “<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fleet, I shall put you to the same test that Berder failed in. Arrange that counter sufficiently well to prove that it was your hands that arranged this.”</p>
			<p>Dennis stepped forward promptly, but with a pale face and compressed lips. Feeling that both honor and success were at stake, he grouped and combined everything as before, as far as the articles would permit, having no time to originate a new plan. As he worked, the clerks gazed in open astonishment, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ludolph looked significantly at his daughter, while she watched him with something of the same wonder which we have when one of the lower animals shows human sagacity and skill.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ludolph was Napoleonic in other respects than his ambition and selfishness. He was shrewd enough to “promote on the field for meritorious services.” Therefore, as Dennis’s task approached completion, he said: “That will do, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fleet, you can finish the work at your leisure. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Berder, you are discharged from this day for deception. I would have borne with your incompetency if you had been truthful. But I never trust anyone who has deceived me once,” he said, so sternly that even Christine’s cheek paled. “<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Schwartz will settle with you, and let me never see or hear from you again. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fleet, I promote you to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Berder’s counter and pay.”</p>
			<p>Thus this man of the world, without a thought of pity, mercy, or kindly feeling in either case, gave one of his clerks a new impetus toward the devil, and another an important lift toward better things, and then went his way, congratulating himself that all things had worked together for his good, that morning, though where he would find another Dennis Fleet to fill Pat’s place, again vacant, he did not know.</p>
			<p>But Miss Ludolph looked at Dennis somewhat kindly, and with a little honest admiration in her face. He was very different from what she had as a matter of course supposed him to be, and had just done in a quiet, manly way a thing most pleasing to her, so she said with a smile that seemed perfectly heavenly to him, “<em>You</em> are above blacking boots, sir.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
