<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXI: Christine’s Idea of Christians</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-21" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXI</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Christine’s Idea of Christians</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>The large apartment where the amateur performers expected to win their laurels was now filled with all the paraphernalia needed to produce musical, artistic, and scenic effects. Much had been gathered before Dennis’s arrival, and his cartload added all that was necessary. Everything seemed in inextricable confusion.</p>
			<p>“The idea of having anything here tonight!” exclaimed Miss Winthrop. “It will take us a week to get things arranged.”</p>
			<p>“The thing is hopeless,” said the blank young ladies.</p>
			<p>Even Christine looked somewhat dismayed, but she said, “Remember we have till half-past eight.”</p>
			<p>“I will call two or three of the servants,” said Miss Brown.</p>
			<p>“I beg of you do not, at least not yet,” exclaimed Christine. “What will their clumsy hands do in work like this, but mar everything. I have great faith in <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fleet’s abilities,” she continued, turning toward Dennis, with an enchanting smile, and resuming the tactics of the morning. Though the smile went to Dennis’s heart like a fiery arrow, his pride, thoroughly aroused, made him cold and self-possessed. He naturally assumed the manner possible only to the true gentleman who, though wronged, chooses not to show his feelings save by a grave, quiet dignity. In view of their action and manner, he consciously felt himself their superior; and this impression, like an atmosphere, was felt by them also. As they looked upon his tall, erect form, manly bearing, and large dark eyes, in which still lurked the fire of an honest indignation, they felt the impossibility of ordering him about like Mapes the carman. They regarded him for a moment in awkward silence, not knowing what to do or say. Even haughty Christine was embarrassed, for the stronger spirit was present and thoroughly aroused, and it overpowered the weaker natures. Christine had never seen Dennis look like that, and did not know that he could. He was so different from the eager, humble servitor that heretofore had interpreted her very wishes, even before they were spoken! Moreover, the success of their entertainment now depended upon him, and she felt that he was in a mood requiring delicate treatment, and that she could not order him around in the role to which she had assigned him. And yet if she had known him, she might, for he had made up his mind to go through even the most menial service with proud humility, and then be careful not to be so caught again; and, when Dennis had resolved upon a thing, that settled the question so far as he was concerned. Seeing Christine’s hesitation and embarrassment, he stepped forward and said: “Miss Ludolph, if you will indicate <em>your</em> wishes I will carry them out as rapidly as possible. I can soon bring order out of this confusion; and you must have some plan of arrangement.”</p>
			<p>She gave him a quick, grateful glance, that thawed more of his ice than he cared to have melt so quickly.</p>
			<p>“Of course we have,” said she. “This is but the nervous hesitation before the shock of a battle that has all been planned on paper. Here is our programme.”</p>
			<p>“All battles do not go forward in the field as planned on paper, if my feeble memory serves me,” said Miss Winthrop, maliciously.</p>
			<p>“I grant you that,” said Christine, quietly, “and you need not tax your memory so greatly to prove it.”</p>
			<p>She was now very kind and gracious to Dennis, believing that to be the best policy. It usually is, but she received no special proof of it from him: he listened alike to request, suggestion, and compliment. There was nothing sullen or morose in his appearance, nothing resentful or rude. With the utmost respect he heard all she said, and carried out her wishes with that deft, graceful promptness in which he had few equals. At the same time his manner was that of one who thoroughly respected himself⁠—that of a refined and cultivated person, who, having become committed to a disagreeable part, performed it with only the protest of dignified silence.</p>
			<p>As his first step, he cleared a space for action, and arranged everything to be in view when needed. The rapidity with which order emerged from confusion was marvellous to the young ladies.</p>
			<p>Then he took their programme, studied it a few moments, and compared it with the pictures of the scenes they wished to imitate. He then arranged for these one after another, placing everything needed within reach, and where it could readily be seen, making the combinations beforehand as far as possible. As he worked so intelligently and skilfully, requiring so few explanations, the young ladies exchanged significant glances, and strolled into the front parlor. They must express an opinion.</p>
			<p>“I declare, Christine,” said Miss Winthrop, “it is a shame that you did not introduce him, for he is a gentleman. He works like a captive prince.”</p>
			<p>“How romantic!” gushed the colorless young ladies.</p>
			<p>“Nonsense!” said Miss Brown; “I hate to see anyone in his position putting on such airs.”</p>
			<p>As soon as she had seen Dennis fairly at work just like her mother’s servants, or her father’s men, she felt that he ought to be treated as such⁠—riches being Miss Brown’s patent of nobility; and she resolved if possible to lower his ridiculous pride, as she regarded it. Miss Brown was a very handsome, stylish girl of a certain type, but she no more understood Dennis’s feelings than she did Sanskrit.</p>
			<p>Christine said nothing, but admitted to herself, with a secret wonder, that Dennis awakened in her a respect, a sort of fear, that no other man had inspired, save her father. There was something in his manner, though altogether respectful, that made her feel that he was not to be trifled with. This impression was decidedly heightened when, a few moments later, Miss Brown, pursuant of her resolution to lower Dennis’s pride, ordered him in an offensive manner to do something for her that had no connection with the entertainment. At first he acted as if he had not heard her, but his rising color showed that he had. In spite of warning glances from Christine and Miss Winthrop, she repeated her request in a loud, imperious tone.</p>
			<p>Dennis drew himself up to his full height, and, turning his dark eyes full upon her, said, firmly, “I am ever ready to <em>offer</em> any service that a gentleman can to a lady, but surely I am not your footman.”</p>
			<p>“Your pride is ridiculous, sir. You are here to help, and will be paid for it. This is my house, and I expect persons of your position, while in it, to do as they are bidden.”</p>
			<p>“Since such are the rules and principles of your house, permit me at once to leave you in full possession;” and he was about to retire with a manner as cold as <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ludolph himself could have assumed, and as haughty, when a light hand fell upon his arm. Looking down he met the deep blue eyes of Christine Ludolph lifted pleadingly to his.</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fleet, you need not do what is asked. It is not right to require it. In fact we all owe you an apology.” Then, in a low, quick tone, she added, “Will you not stay as a favor to me?”</p>
			<p>She felt his arm tremble under her hand, there was a moment’s hesitation, then he replied, in the same manner, “Miss Ludolph, <em>you</em> can command me on <em>this</em> occasion” (there was no promise for the future); and then he turned to his work as if resolved to see and know nothing else till the ordeal ended.</p>
			<p>In spite of herself Christine blushed, but taking Miss Brown by the arm she led her aside and gave her a vigorous lecture.</p>
			<p>“Are you sane?” she said. “Do you not remember that nearly a thousand dollars’ worth of tickets are sold, and that the people will be here by half-past eight, and at nine we must appear? Even after what he has done, if you should drive him away the thing would be a failure, and we should be the ridiculous town-talk for a year.”</p>
			<p>“But I hate⁠—”</p>
			<p>“No matter what you hate. Treat him as you please tomorrow. We need him now;” and so the petted, wilful girl, spoiled by money and flattery, was kept under restraint.</p>
			<p>A great deal of preparation was required for the last two pieces on the programme, and the young ladies grouped themselves not far off while Dennis worked. Christine explained from time to time as the natural leader of the party. Still an awkward silence followed the scene above described. This restraint could not long endure, and one of the colorless young ladies asked a question that led to more than she intended, and indeed, more than she understood.</p>
			<p>“Christine, what do you do with yourself Sundays? Your pew is not occupied once in an age.”</p>
			<p>“I usually paint most of the day, and ride out with papa in the afternoon when it is pleasant.”</p>
			<p>“Why, you are a perfect little heathen!” they all exclaimed in chorus.</p>
			<p>“Yes, I suppose I am worse than a pagan,” she said, “for I not only do not believe in your superstitions, but have none of my own.”</p>
			<p>“What do you believe in, then?” asked Miss Winthrop.</p>
			<p>“Art, music, fame, power.”</p>
			<p>She announced her creed so coolly and decidedly that Dennis lifted a startled face to hers. She saw his grieved, astonished expression, and it amused her very much. Henceforth she spoke as much for his benefit as for theirs.</p>
			<p>“If you would be equally honest,” she continued, “you would find that your creeds also are very different from the one in the prayerbook.”</p>
			<p>“And what would mine be, pray,” asked one of the colorless young ladies.</p>
			<p>“I will sum it up in one sentence, Miss Jones⁠—‘Keep in the fashion.’ ”</p>
			<p>“I think that you are very unjust. I’m sure I go to church regularly, and attend a great many services in Lent and on Saints’ days. I’ve been confirmed, and all that.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, it is the thing to do in your set. Now, here is Miss Winthrop, a Presbyterian, who manifests quite another religious phase.”</p>
			<p>“Pray what is mine?” asked that lady, laughing.</p>
			<p>“Oh, you want hairsplitting in regard to the high doctrines⁠—clear, brilliant arguments, cutting like sharp, merciless steel into the beliefs of other denominations. Then, after your ‘ism’ has been glorified for an hour on Sunday morning, and all other ‘isms’ pierced and lashed, you descend from your intellectual heights, eat a good dinner, take a nap, and live like the rest of us till the next Sabbath, when (if it is a fine day) you climb some other theological peak, far beyond the limits of perpetual snow, and there take another bird’s-eye view of something that might be found very different if you were nearer to it.”</p>
			<p>“And what is my phase?” asked Miss Brown.</p>
			<p>“Oh, you are an out-and-out sinner, and do just what you please, in spite of priest or prayerbook,” said Christine, with a laugh in which all the ladies joined.</p>
			<p>“Well,” said Miss Brown, “I do not think that I am worse than the rest of you.”</p>
			<p>“Not in the least,” replied Christine. “We all have some form of religion, or none at all, as it accords with our peculiar tastes.”</p>
			<p>“And you mean to say that having a religion or not is a mere matter of taste?” asked Miss Winthrop.</p>
			<p>“Yes, I should say it was, and practically that it <em>is</em>. You ladies, and nearly all that I have met, seem to choose a style of religion suited to your tastes; and the tastes of many incline them to have no religion at all.”</p>
			<p>“Why, Miss Ludolph!” exclaimed Miss Winthrop, her cheeks glowing with honest dissent and zeal for the truth; “our religion is taken from the Bible. Do you not believe in the Bible?”</p>
			<p>“No! not in the sense in which you ask the question; nor you either, my charming Miss Winthrop.”</p>
			<p>“Indeed I do, every word of it,” said the orthodox young lady, hotly.</p>
			<p>“Let me test you. Miss Brown, have you such a book in the house? Oh, yes, here is an elegantly bound copy, but looking as if never opened. And now, Miss Winthrop, this city is full of all sorts of horrid people, living in alleys and tenement houses. They are poor, half-naked, hungry, and sometimes starving. Many are in prison, and more ought to be; many are strangers, more utterly alone and lonely in our crowded streets than on a desert island. They are suffering from varieties of disgusting disease, and having a hard time generally. How many hungry people have you fed? How many strangers (I do not mean distinguished ones from abroad) have you taken in and comforted? How many of the naked have you clothed? And how long is your list of the sick and imprisoned that you have visited, my luxurious little lady?”</p>
			<p>A real pallor overspread Miss Winthrop’s sunny face, for she saw what was coming, but she answered, honestly, “I have done practically nothing of all this.” Then she added: “Papa and mamma are not willing that I should visit such places and people. I have asked that I might, but they always discourage me, and tell of the awful experiences of those who do.”</p>
			<p>“Then they don’t believe the Bible, either,” said Christine; “for if they did they would insist on your doing it; and if you believed you would do all this in spite of them; for see what is written here; the very Being that you worship and dedicate your churches to will say, because of your not doing this, ‘Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels.’ And this is but one of many similar passages. Now all this is a monstrous fable to me. The idea of any such experiences awaiting my lighthearted little Sybarite here!”</p>
			<p>Miss Winthrop had buried her face in her hands, and was trembling from head to foot. The words of God never seemed so real and true before as now when uttered by an unbeliever.</p>
			<p>“I don’t believe there is any such place or things,” said Miss Brown, bluntly.</p>
			<p>“There spake my mature and thoughtful friend who is not to be imposed upon,” said Christine, with a touch of irony in her tone.</p>
			<p>Dennis had listened in sad wonder. Such words of cynical unbelief were in dark, terrible contrast with the fair young face. He saw the mind and training of her father in all she said, but he bitterly condemned the worldly, inconsistent life of multitudes in the church who do more to confirm unbelievers than all their sophistries. But as she went on, seemingly having the argument all her own way, his whole soul burned to meet and refute her fatal views. For her own sake and the others’ as well as for the dishonored name of his Lord, he must in some way turn the tide. Though regarded as a humble servitor, having no right to take part in the conversation, he determined that his hands must lift up the standard of truth if no others would or could. To his joy he found that the programme would soon give him the coveted opportunity.</p>
			<p>Christine went on with a voice as smooth and musical as the flow of a stream over a glacier.</p>
			<p>“I have read the Bible several times, and that is more than all of you can say, I think. It is a wonderful book, and has been the inspiration of some of our best art. There are parts that I enjoy reading very much for their sublimity and peculiarity. But who pretends to live as this old and partially obsolete book teaches? Take my father, for instance. All the gentlemen in the church that I know of can do, and are accustomed to do, just what he does, and some I think do much worse; and yet he is an infidel, as you would term him. And as to the ladies, not the Bible, but fashion rules them with a rod of iron. I have cut free from it all, and art shall be my religion and the inspiration of my life.”</p>
			<p>As Christine talked on, the twilight deepened, and Dennis worked with increasing eagerness.</p>
			<p>“After all,” she continued, “it is only history repeating itself. The educated mind today stands in the same attitude toward Christianity as that of the cultured mind of Greece and Rome toward the older mythology in the second century. Then as now the form of religion was kept up, but belief in its truth was fast dying out. The cities abounded in gorgeous temples, and were thronged with worshippers, but they sacrificed at the dictates of fashion, custom, and law, not of faith. So our cities are adorned with splendid churches, and fashion and the tastes of the congregation decide as to the form of service. The sects differ widely with each other, and all differ with the Bible. The ancients gave no more respect to what was regarded as the will of their imaginary deities than do modern Christians to the precepts of the Bible. People went to the ceremonies, got through with them, and then did what they pleased; and so they do now.</p>
			<p>“Take for instance one of your commonest doctrines, that of prayer; the majority have no practical belief in it. My father has taken me, and out of curiosity I have attended several prayer meetings. The merest fraction of the congregation are present at the best of times, and if the night is stormy the number out is ridiculously small. Yet all profess to believe that the Lord of heaven and earth will be present, and that it is His will that they should be. Your Bible teaches that the Being who controls completely the destiny of every person will be in the midst of those gathered in His name, to hear and answer their petitions. If this is true, then no earthly ruler was every so neglected and insulted, so generally ignored, as this very Deity to whom you ascribe unlimited power, and from whom you say you receive life and everything. An eastern despot would take off the heads of those who treated him in such a style; and a republican politician would scoff at the idea of giving office to such lukewarm followers. Why, here in Christian Chicago the will of God is no more heeded by the majority than that of the Emperor of China, and the Bible might as well be the Koran. Looking at these facts from my impartial standpoint, I am driven to one of two alternatives: either you regard your God as so kind and good, so merciful, that you can trespass on His forbearance to any extent, and treat Him with a neglect and an indifference that none would manifest toward the pettiest earthly potentate, and still all will be well; or else you have no real practical belief in your religion. Though not very charitably inclined, I cannot think quite so meanly of human nature as to take the former view, so I am driven to the latter. For surely no man who wished to live and prosper, no woman who loved her husband and children, could so coolly and continually disregard the Deity in whom they profess to believe, with the old Greek poet, that they ‘live, move, and have their being.’ ”</p>
			<p>The twilight deepened, and Christine continued, her words, portraying the decline of faith, according ominously with the increasing gloom.</p>
			<p>“Why, in order to see the truth of what I am saying, look at the emblem of your faith⁠—the Cross. All its historical associations are those of self-denial, and suffering for others. The Founder of your faith endured death upon it. He was a great, good man like Socrates, though no doubt a mistaken enthusiast. But what He meant He said plainly and clearly, as, for instance, ‘Whosoever doth not bear his cross and come after Me cannot be My disciple.’ I admit that in the past He had a wonderful following. In the ages of martyrdom multitudes left all, and endured all that He did, for His sake. But so there have been other great leaders with equally devoted followers. But in this practical age religious enthusiasm has but little chance. What crosses do the members of the Church of the Holy Virgin take up? and what are borne by your great rich church, Miss Winthrop? The shrewd people of this day manage better, and put their crosses on the top of the church. I suppose they reason that the stone tower can carry it for the whole congregation, on the principle of a laborsaving machine. But, honestly, your modern disciples are no more like their Master than one of the pale, slim, white-kidded gentlemen who will be here tonight is like Richard Coeur de Lion as he led a charge against the Muslims. Your cross is dwindling to a mere pretty ornament⁠—an emblem of a past that is fast fading from men’s memories. It will never have the power to inspire the heart again, as when the Crusaders⁠—”</p>
			<p>At that moment their eyes were blinded by a sudden, dazzling light. There was a general and startled exclamation, and then, awestruck and silent, they gazed as if spellbound upon a luminous cross blazing before them.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
