<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXVII: A Miserable Triumph</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-27" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVII</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">A Miserable Triumph</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>After Ernst’s departure Christine reclined wearily in her chair, quite exhausted by even the slight effort she had made, but her thoughts were busy.</p>
			<p>“What a unique character that Dennis Fleet is! And yet, in view of what he believes and professes, he is both natural and consistent. He seems humble only in station, and that is not his fault. Everything he does seems marked by unusual good taste and intelligence. His earlier position and treatment in the store must have been very galling. I can hardly believe that the gentleman I sang Mendelssohn’s music with the other evening was the same that I laughed at as he blacked old Schwartz’s boots. And yet he saw me laugh, and blacked the boots, conscious that he was a gentleman. It must have been very hard. And yet I would rather do such work myself than live on charity, and so undoubtedly he felt. It is very fortunate that we nearly finished the rearrangement of the pictures before all this occurred, for I could not order him about now as I have done. The fact is, I like servants, not dignified helpers; and knowing what I do, even if he would permit it, I could not speak to him as formerly. But he did show wonderful taste and skill in his help. See now that little ivy-twined basket of luscious fruit: it looks just like him. If he were only rich and titled, what a genuine nobleman he would make! He is among the few men who do not weary or disgust me; so many are coarse and commonplace. I cannot understand it, but I, who fear and care for no one except my father, almost feared him when under Miss Brown’s insolence he looked as few men can. What a jumble the world is! He sweeps the store, while insignificant atoms of men are conspicuous in their littleness by reason of high position.</p>
			<p>“It was very kind of him to send me this tasteful gift after the miserable experience I caused him the other day. I suppose he does it on the principle of returning good for evil, as his creed teaches. Moreover, he seems grateful that father gave him employment, and a chance to earn twice what he receives. He certainly must be promoted at once.</p>
			<p>“Perhaps,” thought she, smiling to herself, while a faint tinge of color came into her cheeks⁠—“perhaps, like so many others, he may be inclined to be a little sentimental also, though he will never be as silly as some of them.</p>
			<p>“What a noble part he acted toward those Bruders! The heart of a pagan could not fail to be touched by that poor little fellow’s story, and it has made me believe that I have more heart than I supposed. Sometimes, especially when I hear or read of some such noble deed, I catch glimpses of a life infinitely better than the one I know, like the sun shining through a rift in the clouds; then they shut down again, and father’s practical wisdom seems the best there is.</p>
			<p>“At any rate,” she said aloud, getting up and walking the floor with something of the old restless energy, “I intend to live while I live, and crowd into life’s brief day all that I can. I thank <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fleet for a few sensations in what would otherwise have been a monotonous, dreary afternoon.”</p>
			<p>“What, strawberries!” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ludolph, coming in. “Where did you get these? They are the first I have seen.”</p>
			<p>“Your man-of-all-work sent them to me,” said Christine, daintily dipping one after another in sugar.</p>
			<p>“Well, that is a good joke.”</p>
			<p>“A most excellent one, which I am enjoying, and in which you may share. Help yourself.”</p>
			<p>“And what has led him to this extravagant favor?”</p>
			<p>“Consistency, I suppose. As a good Christian he would return good for evil; and I certainly caused him many and varied tortures the other day.”</p>
			<p>“No, he is grateful; from first to last the callow youth has been overwhelmed with gratitude that I have permitted him to be worth to me double what I paid him.”</p>
			<p>“Well, you have decided to promote him, have you not?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, he shall have charge of the hanging of new pictures, and the general arrangement of the store, so as to keep up your tasteful and artistic methods. Moreover, he shall meet customers at the door, and direct them just where to find what they want. He is fine-looking, polite, speaks English perfectly, and thus takes well. I can gradually work him in as general salesman, without creating troublesome jealousies.”</p>
			<p>“What will old Schwartz say?”</p>
			<p>“Schwartz is good at finance and figures. I can trust him, and he must relieve me more in this respect. He of course knows that this is the more important work, and will feel honored. As to the others, if they do not like it I can find plenty who will. Fleet’s good fortune will take him quite by surprise. He was performing his old humble duties as briskly and contentedly as usual today.”</p>
			<p>“I am surprised at that, for I should have supposed that he would have been on his dignity somewhat, indicating by manner at least that the time for a change had come. He can indicate a great deal by manner, as you might have learned had you seen him under Miss Brown’s insults and my lack of courtesy. Well, it does me good to find one American whose head is not turned by a little success. You are right though, I think, father; that young fellow can be very useful to you, and a decided help in hastening the time when we can leave this shop life, and enter our true sphere. I am more impatient to go than words can express, for life seems so brief and uncertain that we must grasp things as soon as possible or we lose them forever. Heavens! what a scare I have had! Everything seemed slipping from under my feet yesterday, and I sinking I know not where. Surely by concentrating every energy we can be ready to go by a year from next fall.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, that is my plan now.”</p>
			<p>On the following day Dennis was again promoted and his pay increased. A man more of the Pat Murphy type was found to perform the coarse work of the store. As <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ludolph had said, Dennis could hardly realize his good fortune. He felt like one lifted out of a narrow valley to a breezy hillside. He was now given a vantage-point from which it seemed that he could climb rapidly, and his heart was light as he thought of what he would be able to do for his mother and sisters. Hope grew sanguine as he saw how he would now have the means to pursue his beloved art-studies to far greater advantage. But, above all, his promotion brought him nearer the object of his all-absorbing passion. What he feared would take him one or two years to accomplish he had gained in a day. Hope whispered that perhaps it was through her influence in some degree that he had obtained this advance. Could she have seen and read his ardent glances? Lovers’ hopes will grow like Jonah’s gourd, and die down as quickly. Words could not express his longing to see her again, but for several days she did not come to the store. She merely sent him word to complete the unfinished showroom in accordance with the plan on which they had been working, leaving space on the sides of the room opposite each other for two large pictures. Though much disappointed, Dennis had carefully carried out her bidding.</p>
			<p>Every evening the moment his duties permitted he sought his instructor, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bruder, and, with an eagerness that his friends could not understand, sought to educate hand and eye. Dennis judged rightly that mere business success would never open to him a way to the heart of such a girl as Christine. His only hope of winning even her attention was to excel in the world of art, where she hoped to shine as a queen. Then to his untiring industry and eager attention he added real genius for his tasks, and it was astonishing what progress he made. When at the close of his daily lesson Dennis had taken his departure, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bruder would shake his head, and cast up his eyes in wonder, and exclaim: “Dot youth vill astonish de vorld yet. Never in all Germany haf I seen such a scholar.”</p>
			<p>Often till after midnight he would study in the solitude of his own little room. And now, relieved of duties in the early morning, he arranged an old easel in the attic of the store, a sort of general lumber-room, yet with a good light for his purpose. Here he secured two good hours daily, and often more, for painting; and his hand grew skilful, and his eye true, under his earnest efforts. But his intense application caused his body to grow thin and his face pale.</p>
			<p>Christine had rapidly recovered from her illness, her vital and elastic constitution rebounding back into health and vigor like a bow rarely bent. She, too, was working scarcely less eagerly than Dennis, and preparing for a triumph which she hoped would be the earnest of the fame she meant to achieve. She no longer came to the store with her father in the morning, but spent the best and early hours of the day in painting, riding out along the lake and in the park in the afternoon. Occasionally she came to the store in the after part of the day, glanced sharply round to see that her tasteful arrangement was kept up, and ever seemed satisfied.</p>
			<p>Dennis was usually busy with customers at that time, and, though conscious of her presence the moment she entered, found no excuse or encouragement to approach. The best he ever received from her was a slight smile and a cold bow of recognition, and in her haste and self-absorption she did not always give these. She evidently had something on her mind by which it was completely occupied.</p>
			<p>“She does not even think of me,” sighed Dennis; “she evidently imagines that there is an immeasurable distance between us yet.”</p>
			<p>He was right; she did not think of him, and scarcely thought of anyone else, so absorbed was she in the hope of a great success that now was almost sure. She had sent her thanks for the berries by her father, which so frightened Dennis that he had ventured on no more such favors. She had interceded for his promotion. Surely she had paid her debt, and was at quits. So she would have been if he had only given her a basket of strawberries, but having given his heart, and lifelong love, he could scarcely be expected to be satisfied. But he vowed after each blank day all the more resolutely that he would win her attention, secure recognition of his equality, and so be in position for laying siege to her heart.</p>
			<p>But a deadly blight suddenly came over all his hopes.</p>
			<p>One bright morning late in May two large flat boxes were brought to the store. Dennis was busy with customers, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Schwartz said, in his blunt, decided way, that he would see to the hanging of those pictures. They were carried to the showroom in the rear of the store, and Dennis at once concluded that they were something very fine, designed to fill the spaces he had left, and was most anxious to see them. Before he was disengaged they were lifted from their casing and were standing side by side on the floor, opposite the entrance, the warm rich morning light falling upon them with fine effect. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Schwartz seemed unusually excited and perplexed for him, and stared first at one picture, then at the other, in a manner indicating that not their beauty, but some other cause disturbed him.</p>
			<p>Dennis had scarcely had time to exclaim at the exquisite loveliness and finish of the two paintings before <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ludolph entered, accompanied by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cornell, a well-known artist, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> French, proprietor of another large picture-store, and several gentlemen of taste, but of lesser note, whom Dennis had learned to know by sight as habitués of the “Temple of Art.” He also saw that Christine was advancing up the store with a lady and gentleman. Feeling that his presence might be regarded as obtrusive, he passed out, and was about to go away, when he heard his name called.</p>
			<p>Looking up he saw Miss Winthrop holding out her hand, and in a moment more she presented him to her father, who greeted him cordially. Christine also gave him a brief smile, and said: “You need not go away. Come and see the pictures.”</p>
			<p>Quick-eyed Dennis observed that she was filled with suppressed excitement. Her cheeks, usually but slightly tinged with pink, now by turns glowed and were pale. Miss Winthrop seemed to share her nervousness, though what so excited them he could not divine. The paintings, beautiful as they were, could scarcely be the adequate cause; and yet every eye was fastened on them.</p>
			<p>One seemed the exact counterpart of the other in frame and finish as well as subject. A little in the background, upon a crag overhanging the Rhine, was a castle, massive, frowning, and built more for security and defence than comfort. The surrounding landscape was bold, wild, and even gloomy. But in contrast with these rugged and sterner features, was a scene of exquisite softness and tenderness. Beneath the shadow of some great trees not far from the castle gate, a young crusader was taking leave of his fair-haired bride. Her pale, tearful face, wherein love and grief blent indescribably, would move the most callous heart, while the struggle between emotion and the manly pride that would not permit him to give way, in the young chieftain’s features, was scarcely less touching. Beautiful as were the accessories of the pictures, their main point was to portray the natural, tender feeling induced by a parting that might be forever. At first they all gazed quietly and almost reverently at the vivid scene of human love and sorrow, save old Schwartz, who fidgeted about as Dennis had never seen him before. Clearly something was wrong.</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Schwartz,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ludolph, “you may hang the original picture on the side as we enter, and the copy opposite. We would like to see them up, and in a better light.”</p>
			<p>“Dat’s it,” snorted <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Schwartz; “I’d like to know vich is vich.”</p>
			<p>“You do not mean to say that you cannot tell them apart? The original hung here some time, and you saw it every day.”</p>
			<p>“I do mean to say him,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Schwartz, evidently much vexed with himself. “I couldn’t have believed dat any von in de vorld could so impose on me. But de two pictures are just de same to a pin scratch in frame, subject, and treatment, and to save my life I cannot tell dem apart.”</p>
			<p>Christine’s face fairly glowed with triumph, and her eyes were all aflame as she glanced at her friend. Miss Winthrop came and took her cold, quivering hands into her own warm palms, but was scarcely less excited. Dennis saw not this side scene, so intent was he on the pictures.</p>
			<p>“Do you mean to say,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cornell, stepping forward, “that one of these paintings is a copy made here in Chicago, and that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Schwartz cannot tell it from the original?”</p>
			<p>“He says he cannot,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ludolph.</p>
			<p>“And I’d like to see the von who can,” said old Schwartz, gruffly.</p>
			<p>“Will you please point out the original,” said one of the gentlemen, “that we may learn to distinguish them? For my part they seem like the twins whose mother knew them apart by pink and white ribbons, and when the ribbons got mixed she could not tell which was which.”</p>
			<p>Again Christine’s eyes glowed with triumph.</p>
			<p>“Well, really, gentlemen,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ludolph, “I would rather you would discover the copy yourselves. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cornell, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> French, and some others, I think, saw the original several times.”</p>
			<p>“Look at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fleet,” whispered Miss Winthrop to Christine.</p>
			<p>She looked, and her attention was riveted to him. Step by step, he had drawn nearer, and his eyes were eagerly glancing from one picture to the other as if following up a clue. Instinctively she felt that he would solve the question, and her little hands clenched, and her brow grew dark.</p>
			<p>“Really,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cornell, “I did not know that we had an artist in Chicago who could copy the work of one of the best European painters so that there need be a moment’s hesitancy in detecting differences, but it seems I am mistaken. I am almost as puzzled as <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Schwartz.”</p>
			<p>“The frames are exactly alike,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> French.</p>
			<p>“There is a difference between the two pictures,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cornell, slowly. “I can feel it rather than see it. They seem alike, line for line and feature for feature, in every part; and just where the difference lies and in what it consists I cannot tell for the life of me.”</p>
			<p>With the manner of one who had settled a difficult problem, Dennis gave a sigh of relief so audible that several glanced at him.</p>
			<p>“Perhaps <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fleet from his superior knowledge and long experience can settle this question,” said Christine, sarcastically.</p>
			<p>All eyes were turned toward him. He flushed painfully, but said nothing.</p>
			<p>“Speak up,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ludolph, good-naturedly, “if you have any opinion to give.”</p>
			<p>“I would not presume to give my opinion among so many more competent judges.”</p>
			<p>“Come, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fleet,” said Christine, with a covert taunt in her tone, “that is a cheap way of making a reputation. I fear the impression will be given that you have no opinion.”</p>
			<p>Dennis was now very pale, as he ever was under great excitement. The old look came again that the young ladies remembered seeing at Miss Brown’s entertainment.</p>
			<p>“Come, speak up if you can,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ludolph shortly.</p>
			<p>“Your porter, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ludolph?” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cornell, remembering Dennis only in that capacity. “Perhaps he has some private marks by which he can enlighten us.”</p>
			<p>Dennis now acted no longer as porter or clerk, but as a man among men.</p>
			<p>Stepping forward and looking <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cornell full in the face he said: “I can prove to you, sir, that your insinuation is false by simply stating that I never saw those pictures before. The original had been removed from the store before I came. I have had therefore no opportunity of knowing the copy from the original. But the pictures are different, and I can tell precisely wherein I think the difference lies.”</p>
			<p>“Tell it then,” said several voices. Christine stood a little back and on one side, so that he could not see her face, or he would have hesitated long before he spoke. In the firm, decided tones of one thoroughly aroused and sure of his ground, he proceeded.</p>
			<p>“Suppose this the copy,” said he, stepping to one of the pictures. (Christine breathed hard and leaned heavily against her friend.) “I know of but one in Chicago capable of such exquisite work, and he did not do it; indeed he could not, though a master in art.”</p>
			<p>“You refer to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bruder?” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cornell.</p>
			<p>Dennis bowed and continued: “It is the work of one in whom the imitative power is wonderfully developed; but one having never felt⁠—or unable to feel⁠—the emotions here presented cannot portray them. This picture is but the beautiful corpse of that one. While line for line, and feature for feature, and even leaf for leaf on the trees is faithfully exact, yet the soul, the deep, sorrowful tenderness that you feel in that picture rather than see, is wanting in this. In that picture you forget to blame or praise, to criticise at all, so deeply are your sympathies touched. It seems as if in reality two human hearts were being torn asunder before you. This you know to be an exquisite picture only, and can coolly criticise and dwell on every part, and say how admirably it is done.”</p>
			<p>And Dennis bowed and retired.</p>
			<p>“By Jove, he is right,” exclaimed <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cornell; and approving faces and nodding heads confirmed his judgment. But Dennis enjoyed not his triumph, for as he turned he met Christine’s look of agony and hate, and like lightning it flashed through his mind, “She painted the picture.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
