<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>VII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-7" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">A Good Samaritan</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Dennis was too good a Christian, and had received too deep a lesson in his father’s case, to become bitter, angry, and defiant, even if he had believed that God was against him. He would have felt that it was simply his duty to submit⁠—to endure patiently. Somehow Until today his heart had refused to believe that God could be against any of His creatures. In fact, it was his general impression that God had everything to do with his being a good Christian, but very little with his getting a good place. The defect in his religion, and that of his mother, too, was that both separated the spiritual life of the soul too widely from the present life with its material, yet essential, cares and needs. At this point they, like multitudes of others, fell short of their full privilege, and enjoyment of God’s goodness. His mother had cheered and sustained her hard lot by hopes and visions of the better life beyond⁠—by anticipating joys to come. She had never fully learned how God’s love, like the sunlight, could shine upon and brighten the thorny, rocky way, and cause the thorns to blossom, and delicate fragrant flowers to grow in the crevices and bloom in shaded nooks among the sharp stones. She must wait for her consolation. She must look out of her darkness to the light that shone through the portals of the tomb, forgetting that God caused His servants to sing at midnight, in the inner prison, the deepest dungeon, though scourged and bleeding.</p>
			<p>Unconsciously her son had imbibed the same ideas.</p>
			<p>Most devoutly he asked every day to be kept from sin, that he might grow in the Christian life; but he did not ask or expect, save in a vague, general way, that help which a wise, good, earthly father would give to a young, inexperienced child, struggling with the hard, practical difficulties of this world. As the days grew darker and more full of disappointment, he had asked with increasing earnestness that he might be kept from sin⁠—from falling before the many and peculiar temptations that assailed him; and we have seen how God answered his prayer, and kept him where so many would have fallen. But God meant to show him that His goodness extended further than he thought, and that He cared for His children’s well-being now as truly as in the hereafter, when He gathered them home into His immediate presence. But Dennis could not see this now. As far as he thought at all on the subject, he had the vague feeling that God was either trying his faith or meting out some righteous judgment, and he must do the best he could, and only see to it that he did not sin and give way morally.</p>
			<p>Yet, in the thick night of his earthly prospects, Dennis still loved and trusted God. He reasoned justly, that if at last brought to such a place as heaven, no matter what he suffered here, he had only cause for unbounded gratitude. And he felt sure that all would be right in the end, but now feared that his life would be like his father’s, a tissue of disappointments, and that he, an unsuccessful voyager, storm-tossed and shipwrecked, would be thrown upon the heavenly shore by some dark-crested billow of misfortune.</p>
			<p>Thus Dennis sat lost in gloomy musings, but too wearied in mind and body to follow any line of thought long. A few stern facts kept looming up before him, like rocks on which a ship is drifting. He had less than a dollar in his pocket. It was Friday night. If he did not get anything to do on Saturday, how was he going to live through Sunday and the days that followed? Then his dependent mother and sisters rose up before him. They seemed to his morbid fancy hungry and cold, and their famine-pinched faces full of reproach. His head bowed lower, and he became the very picture of dejection.</p>
			<p>He was startled by a big, hearty voice at his side, exclaiming: “What makes yer so down in the mouth? Come, take a drink, and cheer up!”</p>
			<p>Raising his eyes, he saw a round, red face, like a harvest moon, shining full upon him. It was somewhat kindly in its expression, in keeping with the words. Rough as was the courtesy, it went straight to the lonely, discouraged heart of the young man, and with moistened eyes he said, “I thank you for speaking to me in a tone that has a little human touch in it, for the last man that spoke to me left an echo in my ear that I would gladly get out of it.”</p>
			<p>“Bad luck to him, then! Give us yer hand; there!” with a grip like a vise. “Bill Cronk never went back on a man he took to. I tell yer what, stranger,” said he, becoming confidential, “when I saw yer glowering and blinking here in the corner as if yer was listening to yer own funeral sermon, I be ⸺ if I could take a comfortable drink. Come, now, take a good swig of old rye, and see how things will mellow up.”</p>
			<p>Our good Samaritan in this case was a very profane and disreputable one, as many are in this medley world. He had a great, kindly nature, that was crawling and grovelling in all sorts of low, unseemly places, instead of growing straight up toward heaven.</p>
			<p>“I hope you will think me none the less friendly if I decline,” said Dennis. “I would drink with you as quick as with any man living, but it is a thing I never do.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, you’re temperance, are yer? Well, I don’t think none the wuss of yer for standing by yer colors. Between us, it would be better for me if I was a little more so. Hang it all! I take a drop too much now and then. But what is a fellow to do, roughing it up and down the world like me? I should often get lonely and mope in the corner as you did, if I didn’t get up steam. When I am down in the mouth I take a drink to liven me up, and when I feel good I take a drink to make me feel better. When I wouldn’t take a drink on my own hook, I meet somebody that I’d ought to drink with. It is astonishing how many occasions there are to drink, ’specially when a man’s travelling, like me.”</p>
			<p>“No fear but what the devil will make occasions enough,” said Dennis.</p>
			<p>“What has the devil got to do with it?” asked the man, gruffly.</p>
			<p>Just then the miserable wretch entered who, appearing opportunely in Gavin’s Hotel, had cured Dennis of his desire to drink, when weary and despondent, for the sake of the effects. For a moment they looked at the blear-eyed, trembling wreck of a man, and then Dennis asked, “Had God any hand in making that man what he is?”</p>
			<p>“I should say not,” said Bill Cronk, emphatically.</p>
			<p>“Well, I should say the devil had,” said Dennis; “and there behind the bar are the means used⁠—the best tool he has, it seems to me; for with it he gets hold of men with some heart and soul in them, like you.”</p>
			<p>The man winced under the words that both conscience and experience told him were true; at the same time he was propitiated by Dennis’s good opinion of him. He gave a big, good-natured laugh, slapped Dennis on the shoulder, and said: “Wal, stranger, p’raps you’re right. ’Tain’t every temperance lecturer though that has an awful example come in just at the right time so slick. But you’ve stood by yer colors, and we won’t quarrel. Tell us, now, if it ain’t private, what you’re so chopfallen about.”</p>
			<p>Dennis told his story, as grateful for this rough sympathy as a thirsty traveller would be in finding a spring though surrounded by thorns and rocks.</p>
			<p>The round, jolly face actually grew long and serious through interest in the young man’s tribulations.</p>
			<p>After scratching a shaggy but practical head for a few moments, Bill spoke as follows:</p>
			<p>“Seems to me the case is just this: here you are, a young blooded colt, not broken to either saddle or thills⁠—here you are whinnying around a market where they want nothing but dray-hosses. People look shy at you⁠—usually do at a strange hoss. Few know good p’ints when they see ’em. When they find you ain’t broke in to nothin’, they want you to work for nothin’. I see how you can’t do this. And yet fodder is runnin’ short, and you must do somethin’.”</p>
			<p>Bill, having dealt in livestock all his life, naturally clothed his thoughts in language drawn from familiar objects, and Dennis, miserable as he was, half smiled at the close parallel run between him and a young, useless colt; but he only said, “I don’t think there is a carthorse in all Chicago that feels more broken down and dispirited than I do tonight.”</p>
			<p>“That may all be, too,” said Bill; “but you’d feel a little oats mighty quick, and a cart-hoss wouldn’t. But I know the p’ints, whether it’s a man or a hoss; you’d take kindly to work of the right sort, and it would pay anyone to take you at yer own terms, but you can’t make ’em see it. If I was in a situation to take you, I’d do it in a minute. Hang it all! I can’t do much for you, either. I took a drop too much in Cleveland t’other night, and some of the folks in the house looked over my pocketbook and left me just enough to get home with.”</p>
			<p>Dennis shook his head reproachfully and was about to speak.</p>
			<p>“I know what you’re going to say,” said Bill, heading off another temperance lecture. “I’ll take a drink by and by, and think over what you’ve said, for I can’t think much until I get a little steam up. But now we must try and see some way out of the fog for you;” and again in absence of the wonted steam he scratched the shaggy head vigorously.</p>
			<p>“Seems to me the best thing for you is to do as I did when I first broke the home pasture and started out on a rampage. I just grabbed the fust job that come along, good, bad, or indifferent⁠—always kept doing something. You can look for a bird in the bush quite well when you’ve got one in the hand as when you hain’t. To be sure I wasn’t as squeamish as you are. I’d jumped at the offer you had this afternoon; but I reckon I’d taken toll too often to be very profitable. But in this way I always kept a-goin’⁠—never got down underfoot so the stronger ones could tread on me. When it comes to that, I want to die. Now if you’ve got plenty of clear grit⁠—Leetle disposed to show the white feather though, tonight, ain’t yer?”</p>
			<p>Dennis flushed up, and was about to speak, almost angrily.</p>
			<p>“There! there!” said his new friend. “I said yer wasn’t a cart-hoss: one touch of the spur and up goes tail and ears, and then look out. Are yer ashamed to do any kind of honest work? I mean kinder pious work, that hasn’t any smack of the devil you’re so afraid of in it?”</p>
			<p>“No! work is just what I want.”</p>
			<p>“Would you black boots, now?”</p>
			<p>Dennis winced, thought a moment, and then, with a manly flush, said, “Yes, before I would take a cent of charity from any living soul.”</p>
			<p>“Give us yer hand again. You’re the kind of critter I like to invest in; for you’d improve on a feller’s hands. No fear about you; the only thing is to get you in harness before a load that will pay to haul.”</p>
			<p>Suddenly he got up, strode to the barroom door, looked out into the night, and came back again.</p>
			<p>“I think I know of a way in which you can make two or three dollars tomorrow.”</p>
			<p>“How?” exclaimed Dennis, his whole face lighting up with hope.</p>
			<p>“Go to a hardware store, invest in a big wooden snow-shovel, and clean off sidewalks before stores. You can pick up a good many quarters before night, like enough.”</p>
			<p>“I will do it,” said Dennis, heartily, “and thank you warmly for the suggestion, and for your kindly interest generally,” and he looked up and felt himself another man.</p>
			<p>“Gosh! but it takes mighty few oats to set you up! But come, and let us have a little plain, substantial fodder. I will drink nothing but coffee, tonight, out of compliment to you.”</p>
			<p>Cheered, comforted, and hopeful, Dennis sat down with his good Samaritan, and made a hearty supper, after which they parted with a strong friendly grip, and sincere good wishes, Cronk, the drover, going on further west, and Dennis to the rest he so sorely needed.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
