<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXII: Equal to an Emergency</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-22" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Equal to an Emergency</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>The fiery cross that so awed Christine and her little group of auditors was to be the closing scene of the evening entertainment. It was of metal, and by a skilful adjustment of jets was made to appear as if all aflame. While the others were intent on Christine’s words, and she in the interest of her theme had quite forgotten him, Dennis made all his arrangements, and at the critical point narrated in the preceding chapter he turned on the gas with the most startling effect. It seemed a living, vivid refutation of Christine’s words, and even she turned pale. After a moment, for the emblem to make its full impression, Dennis stepped out before them all, his face lighted up by the luminous cross. They admitted that no crusader could look more earnest and brave than he.</p>
			<p>“Miss Ludolph,” he said, in a firm, yet respectful tone, “I should evermore be unworthy of your respect and confidence⁠—what is more, I should be false to myself, false to my faith⁠—should I remain silent in view of what I have been compelled to hear. That sacred emblem has not spent its meaning, or its power. Millions today would die for the sake of Him who suffered on it. Many even of those weak, inconsistent ones that you have so justly condemned would part with life rather than with the faint hope that centres there,” pointing to the radiant symbol.</p>
			<p>“You are rude, sir,” said Christine, her face pale, but her eyes flashing in turn.</p>
			<p>“No, he is right! he is right!” exclaimed Miss Winthrop, springing up with tears in her eyes. “Undeserving as I am of the name of Christian, I would die, I know I would die, before I would give up my poor little hope⁠—though I confess you make me fear that it is a false one. But it’s the best I have, and I mean it shall be better. I think a good touch of persecution, that would bring people out, would do the church more good than anything else.</p>
			<p>“Pardon me, Miss Ludolph,” continued Dennis; “but I appeal to your sense of justice. Could I be a true man and be silent, believing what I do? Could I hear the name of my Best Friend thus spoken of, and say not one word in His behalf?”</p>
			<p>“But I spoke most highly of the Christ of the Bible.”</p>
			<p>“You spoke of Him as a great, good, but mistaken <em>man</em>, an enthusiast. To me He is the mighty God, my Divine Saviour, to whom I owe infinitely more than life. You know that I mean no disrespect to you,” he added, with gentle but manly courtesy. “I regret more deeply than words can express that you honestly think as you do. But if I as honestly believe the Bible, am I not acting as you said a true follower ought? For I assure you it is a heavier cross than you can ever know to speak thus unbidden where I am regarded only as a serving-man. But should I not be false and cowardly if I held my peace? And if you afterward should know that I claimed the name of Christian, would you not despise me as you remembered this scene?”</p>
			<p>Christine bit her lip and hesitated, but her sense of justice prevailed, and she said, “I not only pardon you, but commend your course in view of your evident sincerity.”</p>
			<p>Dennis replied by a low bow.</p>
			<p>At this moment there was a loud ring at the door.</p>
			<p>“There come the gentlemen,” exclaimed Miss Brown. “I am so glad! Oh, dear! what a long, uncomfortable preachment we have had! Now for some fun!”</p>
			<p>The colorless young ladies had stared first at Christine, and then at the cross, in blank amazement.</p>
			<p>At the word “gentlemen” they were all on the alert and ready for <em>real</em> life; but Miss Winthrop left the room for a short time.</p>
			<p>A handsome, lively youth entered, scattering bows and compliments on every side with the offhand ease of an accomplished society man. He paid no heed to Dennis, evidently regarding him as the showman.</p>
			<p>“Well, ladies, you have done your part,” he said; “your arrangements seem complete.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mellen; but where is our tenor?” asked Christine. “We have only three-quarters of an hour for music rehearsal, before we must retire to dress for our parts.”</p>
			<p>“Bad news for you, Miss Ludolph,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mellen, coming to her side; “Archer is sick and can’t come.”</p>
			<p>“Can’t come?” they all exclaimed in dismayed chorus.</p>
			<p>“What is the matter?” asked Miss Winthrop, anxiously, coming in at that moment.</p>
			<p>“Matter enough,” said Miss Brown, poutingly; “that horrid Archer has gone and got sick, I do believe he did it on purpose. He did not know his parts near as well as he ought, and he has taken this way to get out of it.”</p>
			<p>“But he promised me he would study them all the morning,” said Christine. “Oh, I am so sorry! What shall we do? Our entertainment seems fated to be a failure;” and she spoke in a tone of deep disappointment.</p>
			<p>“I assure you I feel the deepest sympathy for you,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mellen, looking tenderly at Christine, “but I did my best. I tried to drag Archer here out of his sickbed, and then I ran around among some other good singers that I know, but none would venture. They said the music was difficult, and would require much practice, and that now is impossible.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, isn’t it too bad?” mourned Miss Winthrop. “The programme is all printed, and the people will be so disappointed! We can’t have that splendid duet that you and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Archer were to sing, Christine. I have a score of friends who were coming to hear that alone.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, as for that matter, half our music is spoiled,” said Christine, dejectedly. “Well, this is the last time I attempt anything of the kind. How in the world we are going to get out of this scrape I do not know. The tickets are so high, and so much has been said, that the people are expecting a great deal, and there is every prospect of a most lame and impotent conclusion.”</p>
			<p>A general gloom settled upon the faces of all. At this moment Dennis stepped forward hesitatingly and said to Christine, “Have you the music that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Archer was to sing?”</p>
			<p>“Certainly! do you suppose it was of the kind that he could extemporize?” said Miss Brown, pertly.</p>
			<p>“Will you let me see it? If you are willing, perhaps I can assist you in this matter.”</p>
			<p>All turned toward him with a look of great surprise.</p>
			<p>“What do you think of that from the man who sweeps <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ludolph’s store?” asked Miss Brown, in a loud whisper.</p>
			<p>“I think the fellow is as presuming as he is ignorant,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mellen, so plainly that all heard him.</p>
			<p>“It is not presuming, sir, to offer a kindness where it is needed,” said Dennis, with dignity, “and my ignorance is not yet proved. The presumption is all on your part.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mellen flushed and was about to answer angrily when Miss Winthrop said hastily, but in a kindly tone, “But really, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fleet, much of our music is new and very difficult.”</p>
			<p>“But it is written, is it not?” asked Dennis, with a smile.</p>
			<p>Christine looked at him in silent wonder. What would he not do next? But she was sorry that he had spoken, for she foresaw only mortification for him.</p>
			<p>“Oh, give him the music by all means,” said Miss Brown, expecting to enjoy his blundering attempts to sing what was far beyond him. “There, I will play the accompaniment. It’s not the tune of Old Hundred that you are to sing now, young man, remember.”</p>
			<p>Dennis glanced over the music, and she began to play a loud, difficult piece.</p>
			<p>He turned to Miss Ludolph, and said: “I fear you have given me the wrong music. Miss Brown is playing something not written here.”</p>
			<p>They exchanged significant glances, and Miss Winthrop said, “Play the right music, Miss Brown.”</p>
			<p>She struck into the music that Dennis held, but played it so out of time that no one could sing it. Dennis laid down his sheets on the piano and said quietly, though with flushed face: “I did not mean to be obtrusive. You all seemed greatly disappointed at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Archer’s absence and the results, and I thought that in view of the emergency it would not be presumption to offer my services. But it seems that I am mistaken.”</p>
			<p>“No, it is not presumption,” said Miss Winthrop. “It was true kindness and courtesy, which has been ill requited. But you see, to be frank, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fleet, we all fear that you do not realize what you are undertaking.”</p>
			<p>“Must I of necessity be an ignoramus because, as Miss Brown says, I sweep a store?”</p>
			<p>“Let me play the accompaniment,” said Christine, with the decided manner that few resisted, and she went correctly through the difficult and brilliant passage. Dennis followed his part with both eye and ear, and then said, “Perhaps I had better sing my part alone first, and then you can correct any mistakes.”</p>
			<p>There was a flutter of expectation, a wink from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mellen, and an audible titter from Miss Brown.</p>
			<p>“Certainly,” said Miss Ludolph, who thought to herself, “If he will make a fool of himself, he may;” and she played the brief prelude.</p>
			<p>Then prompt at the proper moment, true to time and note, Dennis’s rich, powerful tenor voice startled and then entranced them all. He sung the entire passage through with only such mistakes as resulted from his nervousness and embarrassment.</p>
			<p>At the close, all exclaimed in admiration save Miss Brown, who bit her lip in ill-concealed vexation, and said, with a half-sneer, “Really, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> What-is-your-name, you are almost equal to Blind Tom.”</p>
			<p>“You do Blind Tom great injustice,” said Dennis. “I read my music.”</p>
			<p>“But how did you learn to read music in that style?” asked Christine.</p>
			<p>“Of course it took me years to do so. But no one could join our musical club at college who could not read anything placed before him.”</p>
			<p>“It must have been small and select, then.”</p>
			<p>“It was.”</p>
			<p>“How often had you sung that piece before?” asked Miss Brown.</p>
			<p>“I never saw it before,” answered Dennis.</p>
			<p>“Why, it is just out,” said Christine.</p>
			<p>“Well, ladies and gentlemen, our troubles are over at last,” said Miss Winthrop. “<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fleet seems a good genius⁠—equal to any emergency. If he can sing that difficult passage, he can sing anything else we have. We had better run over our parts, and then to our toilets.”</p>
			<p>One of the colorless young ladies played the accompaniments, her music making a sort of neutral tint, against which their rich and varied voices came out with better effect. They sung rapidly through the programme, Dennis sustaining his parts correctly and with taste. He could read like the page of an open book any music placed before him, and years of practice enabled him to sing true and with confidence. As he sung one thing after another with perfect ease, their wonder grew; and when, in the final duet with Christine, they both came out strongly, their splendid, thoroughly-trained voices blending in perfect harmony, they were rewarded with a spontaneous burst of applause, in which even Miss Brown was compelled to join.</p>
			<p>Christine said nothing, but gave Dennis a quick, grateful glance, which amply repaid him for the martyrdom she had led him into that afternoon.</p>
			<p>He acknowledged the plaudits of the others with a slight, cool bow, but her thanks with a warm flush of pleasure, and then turned to complete his arrangements as if nothing had happened. There was not the slightest show of exultation or of a purpose to demand equality, in view of what had taken place. His old manner returned, and he acted as if they were all strangers to him. They exchanged significant, wondering glances, and after a brief consultation retired to the dining-room, where coffee and sandwiches were waiting. Miss Winthrop and Christine sincerely hoped that Miss Brown would invite Dennis out, but she did not, and since it was her house, as she had said, they could not interfere. Dennis heard the clatter of knives and forks, and saw that he was again slighted; but he did not care now. Indeed, in the light of the sacred emblem before which he had stood, he had learned patience. He remembered how the rich and great of the world had treated his Master. Then, too, Christine’s kind, grateful glance seemed to fall upon him like a warm ray of sunlight.</p>
			<p>When they had finished and were about to dress for their parts, Miss Brown put her head within the door and said, “You will find some lunch in the dining-room.”</p>
			<p>Dennis paid no heed to her, but he heard Miss Winthrop say: “Really, Miss Brown, that is too bad after what he has done and shown himself to be. I wonder that he does not leave the house.”</p>
			<p>“He will not do that until he is no longer needed,” said Christine.</p>
			<p>“Then he may as soon as he chooses,” said Miss Brown. She was a girl of violent prejudices, and from her very nature would instinctively dislike such a person as Dennis Fleet.</p>
			<p>“Well,” said Miss Winthrop, “he is a gentleman, and he gave the strongest proof of it when he quietly and modestly withdrew after achieving a success that would have turned anyone’s head, and that ought to have secured him full recognition.”</p>
			<p>“I told you he was a gentleman,” said Christine, briefly, “and I consider myself a judge;” and then their voices passed out of hearing.</p>
			<p>Dennis, having arranged everything so that he could place his hands readily upon it, found that he had half an hour to spare. He said to himself: “Miss Ludolph is wrong. I shall leave the house for a short time. I am a most unromantic individual; for, no matter what or how I feel, I do get hungry. But I am sure Miss Brown’s coffee and sandwiches would choke me. I have already swallowed too much from her to care for any more, so here’s for a restaurant.”</p>
			<p>Miss Winthrop hastened through her toilet in order that she might come down and speak to Dennis while he was alone. She wished to thank him for his course and his vindication of the truth, and to assure him that she both respected him and would treat him as a true gentleman. She went into the back parlor, but he was not there; then she passed to the dining-room, but found only servants clearing away and preparing for the grand supper of the evening.</p>
			<p>In quick alarm she asked, “Where is <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fleet?”</p>
			<p>“Is it the man in the back parlor, mum? He’s just after goin’ out.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, girls!” exclaimed Miss Winthrop, rushing upstairs, “<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fleet has gone.”</p>
			<p>And there was general consternation.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
