<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XLVIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-48" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVIII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Doctor Arten Struck by Lightning</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Hastening down into the body of the church, Dennis and Christine found Mrs. Leonard lying on some cushions in a pew. She was scantily clad, her sweet face scorched and blackened, and her beautiful hair almost crisped away.</p>
			<p>Her husband was bending over her in an agony of mingled grief and joy. She had just been brought in from wandering aimlessly and alone quite out upon the prairie, singing in a low, plaintive way to herself words suggested by the sudden disaster that had temporarily robbed her of husband, of reason, and almost of life.</p>
			<p>Dennis afterward learned from Professor Leonard that when first aroused they had escaped from the hotel, but, not realizing the danger, he had stepped back a moment at her request to get something she valued very much, and they had become separated.</p>
			<p>“And thus at last I find the poor child,” he cried, with a look of agony.</p>
			<p>Mrs. Leonard did not know any of them, but continued her low, plaintive singing.</p>
			<p>Dr. Arten, who had found his way to the church as one of the centres, was soon in attendance, his benevolent face becoming the very embodiment of pity. The crowd were pushed back, and with other kind ladies Christine took charge of her poor unconscious friend, and all was done that skill and tender love could suggest. At last, under the doctor’s opiates, her low, weird singing ceased, and she slept, her husband holding her hand. The thronging fugitives were kept a little away, and Dr. Arten slept near, to be within call.</p>
			<p>A lady asked Christine to go home with her, but she thanked her and said, “No, I would rather remain in the church near my friends.”</p>
			<p>Dennis saw that she was greatly wearied. Taking her hand, he said: “Miss Ludolph, it is my turn to take care of you again. See, our friends are preparing a place there for the ladies to sleep. Please go to rest at once, for you do indeed need it.”</p>
			<p>“I am very tired, but I know I could not sleep. How strange this life is! All day, the world, in spite of what has happened, seemed growing brighter. Now with the night has come the deeper darkness of sorrow. On every side pain and suffering seem to predominate, and to me there will ever be so much mystery in events like my father’s death and my friend Susie’s experience, that I know it will be hard to maintain a childlike faith.”</p>
			<p>“God will help you to trust; you will not be left to struggle alone. Then remember you are His child, and earthly parents do much that little children cannot understand.”</p>
			<p>With a faint smile she answered: “I fear I shall be one of those troublesome children that are ever asking why. All day it has seemed so easy to be a Christian, but already I learn that there will be times when I shall have to cling to my Saviour, instead of being carried forward in His arms. Indeed, I almost fear that I shall lose Him in the darkness.”</p>
			<p>“But He will not lose you,” replied Dennis. “Since you are not sleepy, let me tell you a short Bible story.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, do, please do, just as if I were a little child.”</p>
			<p>“It is in the New Testament. Jesus had sent His disciples in a boat across the sea of Galilee, while He should go up alone on a mountain to pray. The night came, and with it a storm swept down against the disciples. The smooth sea was lashed into great foam-crested waves which broke over their little ship. They tugged hour after hour at the oars, but in vain. The night grew darker, the wind more contrary, the waves higher and more threatening, their arms wearied, and they may have feared that they would perish alone and without remedy in the black midnight. But we read that ‘He saw them toiling in rowing,’ though they knew it not. From the distant mountain side ‘He saw them’⁠—marked every weary stroke of the oar, and every throb of fear. But at last, when they were most ready to welcome Him, when none could say, ‘We should have rowed through the storm alone,’ He came to them walking safely on the dark waves that threatened them with death, and said, ‘Be of good cheer, it is I; be not afraid.’ Then they gladly received Him into the ship, and immediately the rough waves were hushed, and the keel of the boat grated on the beach toward which they had vainly rowed. Then they that were in the ship came and worshipped Him, saying, ‘Of a truth thou art the Son of God.’</p>
			<p>“Now it was on the evening of that very night that these same disciples had engaged in a scene of festivity. They had stood in the sunset on the mountain slope, and seen their Lord feed many thousand. Then all was peace, safety, and good cheer. Life changed as quickly for them as for you, but did not their Divine Master see them as truly in the stormy night as in the sunlight? Did He leave them to perish?</p>
			<p>“He is watching you, Miss Ludolph, for He is ever the same; and before this stormy night of your sorrow passes away you will hear His voice, saying, ‘Be of good cheer, it is I; be not afraid.’ ”</p>
			<p>“Already I hear it,” she said, in a low, glad voice, smiling through her tears. “I can, I do trust Him, and the conflicting winds of doubt and fear are becoming still. Among all these homeless people there must be many sad, discouraged hearts. You have helped me so much; can you not say a word or sing something that will help them?”</p>
			<p>Dennis thought a moment, and then, in a sweet, clear voice that penetrated every part of the large building, sang:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
				<p>
					<span>“Father in Heaven, the night is around us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Terror and danger our portion have been;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We cry unto Thee, oh, save and defend us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Comfort the trembling, and pardon our sin.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Hearts that are heavy, look onward and upward;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though wild was the storm that wrecked your loved homes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Faith lifts your sad glances hopefully heavenward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To mansions prepared with glory-crowned domes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Hearts that are breaking, whose lov’d ones have vanished,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Swept down in the seething ocean of fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>E’en now they may rest where pain is all banished,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And join their glad songs with the heavenly choir.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Hearts that are groaning with life’s weary burden,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who fear to go forward, to sorrow a prey;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Jesus invites you⁠—‘Oh, come, heavy laden’;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Leave sin at His feet, bear mercy away.”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>After the first line there was a breathless hush; but, when he closed, low sobbings might be heard from many of the women, and in the dim light not a few tears shone in the eyes of manhood. Dennis’s voice was sympathetic in its character, and he had the power of throwing into it much feeling.</p>
			<p>Christine was weeping quietly, but her tears now were like the warm spring rain as it falls on the precious seed. At last she said, “You have done these people much good.”</p>
			<p>“To you belongs all the credit, for it was at your suggestion I sang.”</p>
			<p>She shook her head, and then said, “Good-night, my friend, I shall never forget this day with its mingled experience; but I think, I hope, I shall never doubt God again;” and she went to her rest.</p>
			<p>The light of the next day brought to view many hard realities, and chief among these was the bread question. Dennis was up with the dawn, and by eager inquiries sought to comprehend the situation. Some were gloomy and discouraged, some apathetic, and some determined, courageous, and hopeful; and to this last class he belonged.</p>
			<p>Most thankful that he had come out of the fiery ordeal unscathed, he resolved to contribute his quota toward a new and better Chicago. Young, and sanguine in temperament, he already saw the city rise from its ashes in statelier proportions and richer prosperity. With a thrill of exultation he heard the report that some Napoleonic business men had already telegraphed for building material, and were even now excavating the hot ruins.</p>
			<p>Christine had hardly joined him as he stood at the door when a gentleman entered and asked, “Who here are willing and able to work for fair wages?”</p>
			<p>“I am at your service,” said Dennis, stepping forward promptly.</p>
			<p>“You are a gentleman, sir,” said the speaker, impressed with the fact by Dennis’s bearing, though his hat and coat were gone; “I need laborers who can handle the pick and shovel.”</p>
			<p>“I will work for less, then, till I can handle these tools as well as a laborer. There is no reason why I should eat the bread of charity a day longer, especially when so many need it more than I.”</p>
			<p>“I said you were a gentleman; I now say you are a man, and that to me means a great deal more,” said the energetic stranger. “You shall have two dollars a day with the rest.”</p>
			<p>He turned to Christine and said, almost proudly, “The supper you have to-night shall be yours also.”</p>
			<p>“That is,” she replied, with a smile, “I shall live on your charity instead of that of some one else.”</p>
			<p>His face grew sad at once, but he answered, as he went away, “I could not give you charity, Miss Ludolph.”</p>
			<p>Christine saw that she had pained him, and was much vexed with herself. But his remark added to the hope and almost belief that she still held her old place in his heart, and she resolved to make amends in the evening for her unlucky speech.</p>
			<p>With a smile she said to herself: “If he only knew that I would prefer the coarsest, scantiest fare provided by him to the most costly banquet, he would not have gone away with that long face. How rich life would be if I could commence it with him, and we struggle up together! Oh, Heaven, grant,” she sighed, looking earnestly upward, “that through these wonderful, terrible changes, I may climb the mountain at his side, as he so graphically portrayed it in his picture!”</p>
			<p>Mrs. Leonard still slept, and her husband in an agony of anxiety watched at her side. At last, a little before midday, she opened her eyes and said, in her natural tone: “Why, John, I must have greatly overslept. Where am I?” and then, as her husband fairly sobbed for joy, she started up and said, hurriedly: “What is the matter? What has happened?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, be calm!” whispered Christine to the professor. “Everything depends on keeping her quiet.” Then she bent over her friend, and said: “Do not be alarmed, Susie; you are now safe and well, and so is your husband. But you have been ill, and for his sake and your own you must keep quiet.”</p>
			<p>She turned inquiringly to her husband, who said, more calmly, “It is all true, and if you can only be careful we can go back to Boston as well as ever.”</p>
			<p>“I will do anything you say, John; but why am I in a church?”</p>
			<p>“You were taken sick in the street, and this was the nearest place to bring you.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, dear! I have had such strange, dreadful dreams. I am so glad they were only dreams, and you are here with me;” and she lay quietly holding her husband’s hands and looking contentedly in his face. It was evident she was herself again, and much better.</p>
			<p>Dr. Arten soon after came and said, cheerily, “All right! all right! will have you out in a day or two as good as new, and then, Miss Ludolph, you will see how much more grateful she is to the old doctor than you were.”</p>
			<p>“You must present your bill,” replied Christine, with a smile.</p>
			<p>“May I?” retorted the doctor, wiping his lips.</p>
			<p>“Oh, I don’t know about that,” cried Christine; adding, quickly, “when I welcome you to my own home you may.”</p>
			<p>“An old maid’s hall, I suppose.”</p>
			<p>“It will be an orphan’s home, at least,” said Christine, softly and sadly.</p>
			<p>Tears filled the old man’s eyes, and putting his arm around her he drew her to him, saying, as he stroked her drooping head: “Poor child! poor child! I did not know. But you shall never want a protector while the old doctor is above ground. As far as possible I will be a father to you;” and Christine knew she had found a friend as true and strong as steel, and she buried her face on his shoulder and cried as trustingly as his own child might have done.</p>
			<p>“Oh, Christine!” cried Mrs. Leonard, “I am so sorry for you!”</p>
			<p>At the voice of her old friend she at once rallied, and, trying to smile through her tears, said, “God has been so much better to me than I deserved that I have only gratitude when I think of myself; but my poor father⁠—” and again she covered her face and wept.</p>
			<p>“Christine, come here,” said Mrs. Leonard, softly, and she put her arms around the weeping girl. “You spoke of God’s being good to you. Have you in truth found and learned to trust Him?”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” she replied, eagerly, joy and peace coming out in her face like the sun shining through clouds and rain. Then with bowed head she whispered low: “The one I wronged on earth led me to the One I wronged in heaven, and both have forgiven me. Oh, I am so glad, so happy!”</p>
			<p>“Then you have seen Mr. Fleet.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, he saved my life again and again, but in teaching me how to find my Saviour, he has done far more for me.”</p>
			<p>“And you will not wrong him any more, will you, Christine? He has loved you so long and faithfully.”</p>
			<p>In reply she lifted an eager face to her friend and said, “Do you think he can love me still after my treatment of him?”</p>
			<p>“Give him a chance to tell you,” said Mrs. Leonard, with a half-mischievous smile. “Has he not shown his feelings?”</p>
			<p>“He has treated me more as a brother might have done, and yet he is so very respectful and deferential⁠—I hope⁠—but I am not perfectly sure⁠—and then he seems under some restraint.”</p>
			<p>Mrs. Leonard said, musingly: “He knows that you are Baroness Ludolph. I told him last week, for I thought he ought to know, and the fact of your approaching departure for Europe has been no secret of late. He thinks you are pledged to a future in which he cannot share; and in your grateful, dependent condition he would not cause you the pain of refusing him. I think that is just where he stands,” she concluded, with a woman’s mastery of the science of love, and taking almost as much interest in her friend’s affair as she had felt in her own. To most ladies this subject has a peculiar fascination, and, having settled their own matters, they enter with scarcely less zest on the task of helping others arrange theirs. Mrs. Leonard rallied faster under the excitement of this new interest than from the doctor’s remedies.</p>
			<p>After a few moments’ thought Christine said, decidedly: “All that nonsense about the Baroness Ludolph is past forever⁠—burned up in the fire with many things of more value. I have been fed too long on the husks of human greatness and ambition to want any more of them. They never did satisfy me, and in the light and heat of the terrific ordeal through which I have just passed they shrivelled into utter nothingness. I want something that I cannot lose in a whiff of smoke and flame, and I think I have found it. Henceforth I claim no other character than that of a simple Christian girl.” Then bowing her head on her friend’s shoulder she added, in a whisper, “If I could climb to true greatness by Mr. Fleet’s side, as he portrayed it in his picture, it seems to me heaven would begin at once.”</p>
			<p>The doctor, who had taken the professor aside, now joined them, and said: “Mrs. Leonard, you have only to take reasonable care of yourself, and you will soon recover from this shock and exposure. I wish all my patients were doing as well.”</p>
			<p>She replied with a smile, taking her husband’s hand: “Since I have found my old Greek here, with his learned spectacles, I am quite myself, and I feel as if I were only playing invalid.”</p>
			<p>“You may have slept in a church before,” said the doctor, with a twinkle in his eye, “and you must do so again. But no one will thunder at you from the pulpit this time, so I leave you in peace and security, and to-night will be within call.”</p>
			<p>Christine followed him to the lobby of the church, when the irrepressible joker could not forbear saying: “Now let me give you a little paternal advice. Don’t be too grateful to that young Fleet. He only did his duty, and of course doesn’t deserve any special⁠—”</p>
			<p>Christine, with flushing cheeks, interrupted him as if she had not heard: “Doctor, how good and kind you are! Here you are off without any rest to look after the sick and suffering, and you seem to bring health and hope wherever you go.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, yes; but I send my bill in too⁠—mind that.” (Some of his poorer patients never received any, and he, when twitted of the fact, would mutter, roughly, “Business oversight⁠—can’t attend to everything.”)</p>
			<p>Christine looked for a moment at the face so inspiring in its hearty benevolence, and with an impulse, so unlike the cold, haughty girl of old, sprang forward, threw her arms around his neck, and gave him a kiss which he declared afterward was like a mild stroke of lightning, and said, “And there is the first instalment of what I owe you.”</p>
			<p>The old gentleman looked as if he decidedly liked the currency, and with moistened eyes that he vainly tried to render humorous, he raised his finger impressively in parting, and said, “Don’t you ever get out of debt to me.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
