<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXXIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-33" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Two Pictures</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>When Christine saw that Dennis was not in the room, she rushed to a window only in time to see his retreating form passing down the street. For a moment she felt like one left alone to perish on a sinking wreck. His words, so assured in their tones, seemed like those of a prophet. Conscience echoed them, and a chill of fear came over her heart. What if he were right? What if she had let the one golden opportunity of her life pass? Even though she had stolen her inspiration from him through guile and cruelty, had he not enabled her to accomplish more than in all her life before? To what might he not have led her, if she had put her hand frankly and truthfully in his? There are times when to those most bewildered in mazes of error light breaks, clear and unmistakable, defining right and wrong with terrible distinctness. Such an hour was this to Christine. The law of God written on her heart asserted itself, and she trembled at the guilty thing she saw herself to be. But there seemed no remedy save in the one she had driven away, never to return, as she believed. After a brief but painful revery she exclaimed: “But what am I thinking of? What can he or any man of this land be to me?”</p>
			<p>Then pride, her dominant trait, awoke as she recalled his words.</p>
			<p>“He despises me, does he? I will teach him that I belong to a sphere he cannot touch⁠—the poor infatuated youth! And did he dream that I, Christine Ludolph, could give him my hand? He shall learn some day that none in this land could receive that honor, and none save the proudest in my own may hope for it. The idea of my giving up my ancient and honorable name for the sake of this unknown Yankee youth.”</p>
			<p>Bold, proud words that her heart did not echo.</p>
			<p>But pride and anger were now her controlling impulses, and with the strong grasp of her resolute will she crushed back her gentler and better feelings, and became more icy and hard than ever.</p>
			<p>By such choice and action, men and women commit moral suicide.</p>
			<p>With a cold, white face, and a burnished gleam in her eyes, she went to the easel and commenced painting out the ominous black stain.</p>
			<p>“I’ll prove him a false prophet also. I will be an artist without passing through all his sentimental and superstitious phases that have so amused me during the past weeks. I have seen his lovelorn face too often not to be able to reproduce it and its various expressions.”</p>
			<p>Her strokes were quick and almost fierce.</p>
			<p>“Mrs. Dennis Fleet, ha! ha! ha!” and her laugh was as harsh and discordant as the feeling that prompted it.</p>
			<p>Again, a little later: “He despises me! Well, he is the first man that ever dared to say that;” and her face was flushed and dark with anger.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Dennis at first walked rapidly from the scene of his bitter disappointment, but his steps soon grew slow and feeble. The point of endurance was passed. Body and mind acting and reacting on each other had been taxed beyond their powers, and both were giving way. He felt that they were, and struggled to reach the store before the crisis should come. Weak and trembling, he mounted the steps, but fell fainting across the threshold. One of the clerks saw him fall and gave the alarm. Mr. Ludolph, Mr. Schwartz, and others hastened to the spot. Dennis was carried to his room, and a messenger was despatched for Dr. Arten. Ernst, with flying feet, and wild, frightened face, soon reached his home in De Koven Street, and startled his father and mother with the tidings.</p>
			<p>The child feared that Dennis was dead, his face was so thin and white. Leaving the children in Ernst’s care, both Mr. and Mrs. Bruder, prompted by their strong gratitude to Dennis, rushed through the streets as if distracted. Their intense anxiety and warm German feeling caused them to heed no more the curious glances cast after them than would a man swimming for life note the ripple he made.</p>
			<p>When Dennis regained consciousness, they, and Mr. Ludolph and Dr. Arten, were around him. At first his mind was confused, and he could not understand it all.</p>
			<p>“Where am I?” he asked, feebly, “and what has happened?”</p>
			<p>“Do not be alarmed; you have only had a faint turn,” said the doctor.</p>
			<p>“Oh, Mr. Fleet, you vork too hart, you vork too hart; I knew dis vould come,” sobbed Mrs. Bruder.</p>
			<p>“Why, his duties in the store have not been so onerous of late,” said Mr. Ludolph, in some surprise.</p>
			<p>“It is not der vork in der store, but he vork nearly all night too. Den he haf had trouble, I know he haf. Do he say no vort about him?”</p>
			<p>Dennis gave Mrs. Bruder a sudden warning look, and then, through the strong instinct to guard his secret, roused himself.</p>
			<p>“Is it anything serious, doctor?” he asked.</p>
			<p>The physician looked grave, and said, “Your pulse and whole appearance indicate great exhaustion and physical depression, and I also fear that fever may set in.”</p>
			<p>“I think you are right,” said Dennis. “I feel as if I were going to be ill. My mind has a tendency to wander. Mr. Ludolph, will you permit me to go home? If I am to be sick, I want to be with my mother.”</p>
			<p>Mr. Ludolph looked inquiringly at the doctor, who said significantly, in a low tone, “I think it would be as well.”</p>
			<p>“Certainly, Fleet,” said his employer; “though I hope it is only a temporary indisposition, and that you will be back in a few days. You must try and get a good night’s rest, and so be prepared for the journey in the morning.”</p>
			<p>“With your permission I will go at once. A train leaves now in an hour, and by morning I can be at home.”</p>
			<p>“I scarcely think it prudent,” began the doctor.</p>
			<p>“Oh, certainly not to-night,” said Mr. Ludolph, also.</p>
			<p>“Pardon me, I must go at once,” interrupted Dennis, briefly and so decidedly that the gentlemen looked at each other and said no more.</p>
			<p>“Mr. Bruder,” he continued, “I must be indebted to you for a real proof of your friendship. In that drawer you will find my money. The key is in my pocketbook. Will you get a carriage and take me to the depot at once? and can you be so kind as to go on home with me? I cannot trust myself alone. Mrs. Bruder, will you pack up what you think I need?” His faithful friends hastened to do his bidding.</p>
			<p>“Mr. Ludolph, you have been very kind to me. I am sorry this has occurred, but cannot help it. I thank you gratefully, and will now trespass on your valuable time no longer.”</p>
			<p>Mr. Ludolph, feeling that he could be of no further use, said: “You will be back in a week, Fleet. Courage. Good-by.”</p>
			<p>Dennis turned eagerly to the doctor and said: “Can you not give me something that will reduce the fever and keep me sane a little longer? I know that I am going to be delirious, but would reach the refuge of home first.”</p>
			<p>A prescription was given and immediately procured, and the doctor went away shaking his head.</p>
			<p>“This is the way people commit suicide. They know no more about, or pay no more heed to, the laws of health than the laws of China. Here is the result: This young fellow has worked in a way that would break down a cast-iron machine, and now may never see Chicago again.”</p>
			<p>But Dennis might have worked even in his intense way for months and years without serious harm, had not a fair white hand kept him on the rack of uncertainty and fear.</p>
			<p>Not work, but worry, makes havoc of health.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>In the gray dawn Ethel Fleet, summoned from her rest, received her son, weak, unconscious, muttering in delirium, and not recognizing even her familiar face. He was indeed a sad, painful contrast to the ruddy, buoyant youth who had left her a few short months before, abounding in hope and life. But she comforted herself with the thought that neither sin nor shame had brought him home.</p>
			<p>We need not dwell on the weary weeks that followed. Dennis had every advantage that could result from good medical skill and the most faithful nursing. But we believe that his life lay rather in his mother’s prayers of faith. In her strong realization of the spiritual world she would go continually into the very presence of Jesus, and say, “Lord, he whom Thou lovest is sick”; or, like parents of old, she would seem by her importunity to bring the Divine Physician to his very bedside.</p>
			<p>Mr. Bruder, too, insisted on remaining, and watched with the unwearied faithfulness of one who felt that he owed to Dennis far more than life. It was indeed touching to see this man, once so desperate and depraved, now almost as patient and gentle as the mother herself, sitting by his unconscious friend, often turning his eyes heavenward and muttering in deep guttural German as sincere a prayer as ever passed human lips, that Dennis might be spared.</p>
			<p>The hand of God seemed about to take him from them, but their strong, loving faith laid hold of that hand, and put upon it the restraint that only reverent, believing prayer can. Dennis lived. After many days delirium ceased, and the confused mind became clear. But during his delirium Ethel and Mr. Bruder learned from the oft-repeated words, “Cruel, cruel Christine!” the nature of the wound that had nearly destroyed his life.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Mr. Ludolph was late in reaching his home on the evening after Dennis was taken sick. Christine sat in the dusk on the ivy-shaded piazza, awaiting him. He said, abruptly, “What have you been doing to Fleet, over here?”</p>
			<p>For a second her heart stood still, and she was glad the increasing gloom disguised her face. By a great effort she replied, in a cool, matter-of-fact tone: “I do not understand your question. Mr. Fleet was here this afternoon, and gave some finishing touches to my studio. I do not think I shall need him any more.”</p>
			<p>Her quiet, indifferent voice would have disarmed suspicion itself.</p>
			<p>“It is well you do not, for he seems to have received some ‘finishing touches’ himself. He fell across the threshold of the store in a dead faint, and has gone home, threatened with a serious illness.”</p>
			<p>Even her resolute will could not prevent a sharp, startled exclamation.</p>
			<p>“What is the matter?” said her father, hastily; “you are not going to faint also, are you?”</p>
			<p>“No,” said Christine, quietly again; “but I am tired and nervous, and you told your news so abruptly! Why, it seemed but a moment ago he was here at work, and now he is dangerously ill. What an uncertain stumbling forward in the dark life is!”</p>
			<p>This was a style of moralizing peculiarly distasteful to Mr. Ludolph⁠—all the more repugnant because it seemed true, and brought home in Dennis’s experience. Anything that interfered with his plans and interests, even though it might be God’s providence, always angered him. And now he was irritated at the loss of one of his best clerks, just as he was becoming of great value; so he said, sharply: “I hope you are not leaning toward the silly cant of mysterious providence. Life is uncertain stumbling only to fools who can’t see the chances that fortune throws in their way, or recognize the plain laws of health and success. This young Fleet has been putting two days’ work in one for the past four months, and now perhaps his work is done forever, for the doctor looked very grave over him.”</p>
			<p>Again the shadow of night proved most friendly to Christine. Her face had a frightened, guilty look that it was well her father did not see, or he would have wrung from her the whole story. She felt the chill of a terrible dread at heart. If he should die, her conscience would give a fearful verdict against her. She stood trembling, feeling almost powerless to move.</p>
			<p>“Come,” said her father, sharply, “I am hungry and tired.”</p>
			<p>“I will ring for lights and supper,” said Christine hastily, and then fled to her own room.</p>
			<p>When she appeared, her father was sitting at the table impatiently awaiting her. But her face was so white, and there was such an expression in her eyes, that he started and said, “What is the matter?”</p>
			<p>His question irritated her, and she replied as sharply as he had spoken.</p>
			<p>“I told you I was tired, and I don’t feel well. I have been a month in constant effort to get this house in order, and I am worn out, I suppose.”</p>
			<p>He looked at her keenly, but said more kindly, “Here, my dear, take this wine”; and he poured out a glass of old port.</p>
			<p>She drank it eagerly, for she felt she must have something that would give her life, warmth, and courage. In a way she could not understand, her heart sank within her.</p>
			<p>But she saw her father was watching her, and knew she must act skillfully to deceive him. Rallied and strengthened by the generous wine, her resolute will was soon on its throne again, and Mr. Ludolph with all his keen insight was no match for her. In a matter-of-fact tone she said:</p>
			<p>“I do not see how we have worked Mr. Fleet to death. Does he charge anything of the kind?7’</p>
			<p>“Oh, no! but he too seems possessed with the idea of becoming an artist. That drunken old Bruder, whom he appears to have reformed, was giving him lessons, and after working all day he would study much of the night and paint as soon as the light permitted in the morning. He might have made something if he had had a judicious friend to guide him” (“And such you might have been,” whispered her conscience), “but now he drops away like untimely fruit.”</p>
			<p>“It is a pity,” said she, coolly, and changed the subject, as if she had dismissed it from her mind.</p>
			<p>Mr. Ludolph believed that Dennis was no more to his daughter than a useful clerk.</p>
			<p>The next morning Christine rose pale and listless.</p>
			<p>Her father said, “I will arrange my business so that we can go off on a trip in a few days.”</p>
			<p>When left alone she sat down at her easel and tried to restore the expression that had so delighted her on the preceding day. But she could not. Indeed she was greatly vexed to find that her tendency was to paint his stern and scornful look, which had made a deeper impression on her mind than any she had even seen on his face, because so unexpected and novel. She became irritated with herself, and cried, fiercely: “Shame on your weakness! You are unworthy of your blood and ancestry. I will reproduce that face as it was before he so insolently destroyed it;” and she bent over her easel with an expression not at all in harmony with her work. Unconsciously she made a strange contrast, with her severe, hard face and compressed lips, to the look of love and pleading she sought to paint. For several days she wrought with resolute purpose, but found that her inspiration was gone.</p>
			<p>At last she threw down her brush in despair, and cried: “I cannot catch it again. The wretch either smiles or frowns upon me. I fear he was right: I have made my first and last success;” and she leaned her head sullenly and despairingly on her hand. Again the whole scene passed before her, and she dwelt upon every word, as she was beginning often to do now, in painful revery. When she came to the words, “I too mean to be an artist. I could show you a picture that would tell you far more of what I mean than can my poor words” she started up, and, hastily arraying herself for the street, was soon on her way to the Art Building.</p>
			<p>No one heeded her movements there, and she went directly upstairs to his room. Though simple and plain, it had unmistakably been the abode of a gentleman and a person of taste. It was partially dismantled, and in disorder from his hasty departure, and she found nothing which satisfied her quest there. She hastened away, glad to escape from a place where everything seemed full of mute reproach, and next bent her steps to the top floor of the building. In a part half-filled with antiquated lumber, and seldom entered, she saw near a window facing the east an easel with canvas upon it. She was startled at the throbbing of her heart.</p>
			<p>“It is only climbing these long stairs,” she said; but her words were belied by the hesitating manner and eager face with which she approached and removed the covering from the canvas.</p>
			<p>She gazed a moment and then put out her hand for something by which to steady herself. His chair was near, and she sank into it, exclaiming: “He has indeed painted more than he⁠—more than any one⁠—could put into words. He has the genius that I have not. All here is striking and original;” and she sat with her eyes riveted to a painting that had revealed to her⁠—herself.</p>
			<p>Here was the secret of Dennis’s toil and early work. Here were the results of his insatiable demand for the incongruous elements of ice and sunlight.</p>
			<p>Side by side were two emblematic pictures. In the first there opened before Christine a grotto of ice. The light was thin and cold but very clear. Stalactites hung glittering from the vaulted roof. Stalagmites in strange fantastic forms rose to meet them. Vivid brightness and beauty were on every side, but of that kind that threw a chill on the beholder. All was of cold blue ice, and so natural was it that the eye seemed to penetrate its clear crystal. To the right was an opening in the grotto, through which was caught a glimpse of a summer landscape, a vivid contrast to the icy cave.</p>
			<p>But the main features of the picture were two figures. Sleeping on a couch of ice was the form of a young girl. The flow of the drapery, the contour of the form, was grace itself, and yet all was ice. But the face was the most wonderful achievement. Christine saw her own features, as beautiful as in her vainest moments she had ever dared to hope. So perfect was the portrait that the delicate blue veins branched across the temple in veiled distinctness. It was a face that lacked but two things, life and love; and yet in spite of all its beauty the want of these was painfully felt⁠—all the more painfully, even as a lovely face in death awakens a deeper sadness and regret.</p>
			<p>One little icy hand grasped a laurel wreath, also of ice. The other hand hung listless, half open, and from it had dropped a brush that formed a small stalagmite at her side.</p>
			<p>Bending over her in most striking contrast was the figure of a young man, all instinct with life, power, and feeling. Though the face was turned away, Dennis had suggested his own form and manner. His left hand was extended toward the sleeping maiden, as if to awaken her, while with the right he pointed toward the opening through which was seen the summer landscape, and his whole attitude indicated an eager wish to rescue her. This was the first picture.</p>
			<p>The second one was still more suggestive. At the entrance of the grotto, which looked more cold than ever, in its partial shadow, Christine saw herself again, but how changed! She now had a beauty which she could not believe in⁠—could not understand.</p>
			<p>The icy hue and rigidity were all gone. She stood in the warm sunlight, and seemed all warmth and life. Her face glowed with feeling, yet was full of peace.</p>
			<p>Instead of the barren ice, flowers were at her feet, and fruitful trees bent over her. Birds were seen flitting through their branches. The bended boughs, her flowing costume, and the tress of golden hair lifted from her temple, all showed that the summer wind was blowing.</p>
			<p>Everything, in contrast with the frozen, death-like cave, indicated life, activity. Near her, a plane-tree, which in nature’s language is the emblem of genius, towered into the sky; around its trunk twined the passion-flower, meaning, in Flora’s tongue, “Holy love”; while just above her head, sipping the nectar from an open blossom, was a bright-hued butterfly, the symbol of immortality. By her side stood the same tall, manly form, with face still averted. He was pointing, and her eyes, softened, and yet lustrous and happy, were following where a path wound through a long vista, in alternate light and shadow, to a gate, that in the distance looked like a pearl. Above and beyond it, in airy outline, rose the walls and towers of the Holy City, the New Jerusalem.</p>
			<p>For a long time she sat in rapt attention. Moment by moment the paintings in their meaning grew upon her. At last her eyes filled with tears, her bosom rose and fell with an emotion most unwonted, and in low tones she murmured: “Heavenly delusion! and taught with the logic I most dearly love. Oh, that I could believe it! I would give ten thousand years of the life I am leading to know that it is true. Is there, can there be a path that leads through light or shade to a final and heavenly home? If this is true, in spite of all my father’s keen and seemingly convincing arguments, what a terrible mistake our life is!”</p>
			<p>Then her thoughts reverted to the artist.</p>
			<p>“What have I done in driving him away with contempt in his heart for me? I can no more affect haughty superiority to the man who painted those pictures. Though he could not be my lover, what a friend he might have been! I fear I shall never find his equal. Oh, this world of chaos and confusion! What is right? What is best? <i>What is truth?</i> He might have taught me. But the skilful hand that portrayed those wonderful scenes may soon turn to dust, and I shall go to my grave burdened with the thought that I have quenched the brightest genius that will ever shine upon me;” and she clasped her hands in an agony of regret.</p>
			<p>Then came the thought of securing the pictures. Dropping a veil over her red eyes, she went down and got some large sheets of paper, and by fastening them together made a secure covering. Then she carried the light frame with the canvas to the second floor, and, summoning Ernst, started homeward with her treasure. The boy obeyed with reluctance. Since the time she had surprised him out of his secret in regard to the strawberries, he had never liked her, and now he felt that in some way she was the cause of the sickness of his dearest friend. Christine could not bear the reproach of his large, truthful eyes, and their walk was a silent one. At parting she handed him a banknote, but he shook his head.</p>
			<p>“Have you heard from Mr. Fleet?” she asked, with a flush.</p>
			<p>The boy’s lip quivered at the mention of that name, and he answered, hastily: “Fader wrote moder Mr. Fleet was no better. I fear he die;” and in an agony of grief he turned and ran sobbing away.</p>
			<p>From under her veil Christine’s tears were falling fast also, and she entered her elegant home as if it had been a prison.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
