<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>II: Love Known</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">II</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Love Known</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Hour after hour passed. The storm was dying away, and at times, through broken rifts in the clouds, stars would gleam out. Instead of the continued roar and rush, the wind blew in gusts at longer intervals, and nature seemed like a passionate child that had cried itself to sleep. The fitful blasts were the involuntary sobs that heave the breast, till at last quiet and peace take the place of stormy anger.</p>
			<p>It seemed as if the silent watcher never could withdraw her gaze from the beautiful world of her vision. Never had it seemed so near and real before, and she was unconscious of the lapse of time. Suddenly she heard her name called⁠—“Ethel!”</p>
			<p>If the voice had come from the imaginary world present to her fancy, it could not have startled her more for a moment. Then she realized that it was her husband who spoke. He had called her name in his sleep, and yet it seemed a call of God. At once it flashed through her mind that in dreaming of a glorious and happy future she was forgetting him and his need.</p>
			<p>She turned the light upon his face. Never had he looked so pale and wan, and she realized that he might be near his end. In an agony of self-reproach and yearning tenderness she kneeled at his bedside and prayed as she never had prayed before. Could he go home? Could he be received, feeling toward his Father as he did? He had talked of forgiving, when he stood so sorely in need of Christ’s forgiveness; and she had been forgetting that need, when every moment might involve her husband’s salvation. Out of his sleep he had called her to his help. Perhaps God had used his unconscious lips to summon her. With a faith naturally strong, but greatly increased by the vision of the night, she went, as it were, directly into the presence of her Lord, and entreated in behalf of her husband.</p>
			<p>As she thus knelt at the bedside, with her face buried in the covering, she felt a hand placed softly on her head, and again her husband’s voice called, “Ethel!”</p>
			<p>She looked up and saw that he was awake now, his eyes fixed on her with an expression of softness and tenderness that she had not seen for many a long day. The old restless, anxious light had gone.</p>
			<p>“What were you doing, Ethel?” he asked. “Praying that you might see that God loved you⁠—that you might be reconciled to Him.”</p>
			<p>Two great tears gathered in the man’s eyes. His lips quivered a moment, then he said, brokenly, “Surely God must love me, or He would never have given me⁠—a wife⁠—who would watch and pray for me⁠—the long winter night.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, Dennis, forgive me; I cannot deceive you; for a time I forgot you, I forgot everything, and just wandered through Paradise alone. But in your sleep you called me to your help, and now it seems as if I could not be happy even there without you. I pray you, in Christ’s stead, be reconciled to God,” she pleaded, falling into the familiar language of Scripture, as she often did under strong emotion. Then, in low, thrilling words, she portrayed to him the “new earth” of her vision, wherein “God shall wipe away all tears, and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain.” She showed him that all might still be well⁠—that eternity was long enough to make up for the ills of our brief troubled life here. But his mind seemed preoccupied. These future joys did not take that hold upon him that she earnestly desired. His eyes seemed to grow dim in tender, tearful wistfulness, rather than become inspired with immortal hopes. At last he spoke:</p>
			<p>“Ethel, it seemed as if I heard someone calling me. I woke up⁠—and there you⁠—were praying⁠—for me. I heard my name⁠—I heard God’s name⁠—and I knew that you were interceding for me. It seemed to break my hard heart right up like the fountains of the great deep to see you there⁠—praying for me⁠—in the cold, cold room.” (The room was not cold; it was not the winter’s chill that he was feeling, but a chill that comes over the heart even in the tropical summer.) “Then, as you prayed, a great light seemed to shine into my soul. I saw that I had been charging God unjustly with all my failures and misfortunes, when I had to thank myself for them. Like a wilful child, I had been acting as if God had but to carry out my wild schemes. I remembered all my unreasonable murmurings and anger; I remembered the dreadful words I was on the point of uttering tonight, and for a moment it seemed as if the pit would open and swallow me up.”</p>
			<p>He paused for breath, and then went on:</p>
			<p>“But as my despairing eyes glanced restlessly around, they fell upon the face of my son, noble and beautiful even in sleep, and I remembered how God had brought him safely back. Then your low, pleading tone fixed my attention again. It seemed to me that God’s love must be better and stronger than human love, and yet you had loved me through all my folly and weakness; so perhaps had He. Then I felt that such a prayer as you were offering could not remain unheard, you seemed to pray so earnestly. I felt that I ought to pray myself, and I commenced calling out in my heart, ‘God be merciful to me⁠—a sinner.’ Then while I prayed, I seemed to see my Saviour’s face right above your bowed head. Oh, how reproachfully He looked at me! and yet His expression was full of love, too. It was just such a look, I think, that He fixed on Peter when he denied Him. Then it seemed that I fell down at His feet and wept bitterly, and as I did so the look of reproach passed away, and only an expression of love and forgiveness remained. A sudden peace came into my soul which I cannot describe; a rush of tears into my eyes; and when I had wiped them away, I saw only your bowed form praying⁠—praying on for me. And, Ethel dear, my patient, much-enduring wife, I believe God has answered your prayer. I feel that I am a new man.”</p>
			<p>“God be praised!” exclaimed his wife, with streaming eyes. Then in a sudden rush of tenderness she clasped her husband to her heart, her strong love seeming like the echo of God’s love, the earnest here on earth of that above, where all barriers shall pass away.</p>
			<p>The sound of their voices toward the last had awakened their son, and he now stood beside them with wet eyes and heaving breast.</p>
			<p>When the wife rose from her embrace, she saw that her husband was very weak. For a few moments he gasped for breath. Then, getting a little easier, he looked up and saw his son, and exclaimed: “Thank God⁠—my boy⁠—thank God⁠—you are here. Ah, my son⁠—I have learned much⁠—since we spoke together last. I have seen that⁠—I have much more⁠—need of forgiveness than⁠—to forgive. Thanks to your⁠—mother’s prayers⁠—I believe⁠—I feel sure that I am forgiven.”</p>
			<p>“More thanks to God’s love, Dennis,” said his wife. “God wanted to forgive you all the time more than we wanted Him to. Thank God, who is rich in mercy, for His great love wherewith He loved us. He is longsuffering to usward, not willing that any should perish.”</p>
			<p>“Those are sweet words, wife, and I have found them true.”</p>
			<p>For a little time they sat with clasped hands, their hearts too full to speak. Faint streaks along the eastern horizon showed that the dawn was near. The sick man gave a slight shiver, and passed his hands across his eyes as if to clear away a mist, and then said, feebly: “Dennis, my son⁠—won’t you turn up the lamp a little⁠—and fix the fire? The room seems getting so cold⁠—and dark.”</p>
			<p>The wife looked at her son in quick alarm. The stove was red-hot, and the lamp, no longer shaded, stood openly on the table.</p>
			<p>The son saw that he must take the lead in the last sad scene, for in the presence of death the heart of the loving, constant woman clung to her husband as never before. Throwing herself on her knees by his side, she cried with loud, choking sobs, “Oh, Dennis⁠—husband⁠—I fear⁠—you are leaving me!”</p>
			<p>“Is this death?” he asked of his son, in an awed tone.</p>
			<p>“I fear it is, father,” said the young man, gently.</p>
			<p>After a moment his father said, composedly: “I think you are right. I feel that⁠—my end is near, Ethel⁠—darling⁠—for my sake⁠—try to be calm⁠—during the last few moments I am with you.”</p>
			<p>A few stifled sobs and the room was still.</p>
			<p>“I have but little time to⁠—put my house⁠—in order⁠—and if I had months⁠—I could not do it. Dennis, I leave you⁠—little else⁠—than debts⁠—embarrassments, and the record of many failures. You must do⁠—the best you can. I am not able to advise you. Only never love this world as I have. It will disappoint you. And, <em>whatever happens, never lose faith in the goodness of God</em>. This has been my bane. It has poisoned my life here, and, had it not been for this dear wife, it would have been my destruction hereafter. For long years⁠—only her patient love⁠—has stood between me and a miserable end. Next to God⁠—I commit her and your little sisters to your care. Be true to this most sacred trust.</p>
			<p>“Ethel, dear, my more than wife⁠—my good angel⁠—what shall I say to you?” and the man’s lip quivered, and for a time he could say no more. But the unwonted composure had come into his wife’s manner. The eyes were gaining that intent look which was their expression when picturing to herself scenes in the life beyond.</p>
			<p>“Oh, Dennis, we seem just on the confines of a glorious world⁠—it is so near, so real⁠—it seems as if but a step would take us all into it. Oh! if you could but see its beauties, its glories⁠—if you could hear the music, you would not fear to enter. It seems as if we were there together now.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, Ethel, come back, come back,” cried her husband, piteously. “I am not worthy of all that. I have no heart for glory now. I can see only my Saviour’s face looking⁠—at me⁠—with love and forgiveness. That is heaven enough for me⁠—and when you come⁠—my cup will be more than full. And now⁠—farewell⁠—for a little while.”</p>
			<p>For a few moments they clung to each other. Then the little girls were brought, and their father pressed his cold lips to their warm, fresh young faces. They wondered at a scene they could not understand, and were tearful because of the tears of others.</p>
			<p>He was now going very fast. Suddenly he turned to his son and said, “Dennis, repeat to me that verse, ‘This is a faithful saying⁠—’ ”</p>
			<p>With a voice hoarse and broken by emotion, his son complied: “This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners.”</p>
			<p>“Of whom I am chief,” said his father, emphatically. “And yet”⁠—his face lighting up with a wan smile, like a sudden ray of light falling on a clouded landscape before the sun sinks below the horizon⁠—“and yet forgiven.”</p>
			<p>By and by he again whispered, “Forgiven!” Then his eyes closed, and all was still. They thought he was gone. But as they stood over him in awed, breathless silence, his lips again moved. Bending down, they heard in faint, faraway tones, like an echo from the <em>other side</em>, “<em>Forgiven!</em>”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
