<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXXVI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-36" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVI</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">An Apparition</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ludolph had hoped to hear on his return that Dennis was dead. That would end all difficulties. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Schwartz did not know;⁠—he was not at last accounts. Ernst was summoned. With a bright, hopeful face he stated that his mother had just received a letter saying Dennis was a little better. He was much surprised at his employer’s heavy frown.</p>
			<p>“He will live,” mused <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ludolph; “and now shall I permit him to return to my employ, or discharge him?”</p>
			<p>His brow contracted in lines of thought that suggested shrewdness, cunning, nothing manly, and warily he judged.</p>
			<p>“If I do not take him, he will go to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> French with certainty. He had better return, for then both he and Christine will be more thoroughly under my surveillance.</p>
			<p>“Curses on Christine’s waywardness! There may be no resisting her, and my best chance will be in managing him. This I could not do if he were in the store of my rival;” and so for unconscious Dennis this important question was decided.</p>
			<p>At last, as we have said, his delirium ceased, and the quiet light of reason came into his eyes. He looked at his mother and smiled, but was too weak even to reach out his hand.</p>
			<p>The doctor, coming in soon after, declared danger past, and that all depended now on good nursing. Little fear of his wanting that!</p>
			<p>“Ah, mine Gott be praised! mine Gott be praised!” exclaimed <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bruder, who had to leave the room to prevent an explosion of his grateful, happy feelings that might have proved too rude a tempest for Dennis in his weak state. He was next seen striding across the fields to a neighboring grove, ejaculating as he went. When he returned his eyes shone with a great peace and joy, and he had evidently been with Him who had cast out the demon from his heart.</p>
			<p>Day after day Dennis rallied. Unlike poor Christine, he had beneath him the two strongest levers, love and prayer, and steadily they lifted him up to health and strength and comparative peace. At last he was able to sit up and walk about feebly, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bruder returned rejoicing to his family. As he wrung Dennis’s hand at parting, he said, in rather a hoarse voice: “If any von tell me Gott is not goot and heareth not prayer, den I tell him he von grand heathen. Oh! but we vill velcome you soon. Ve vill haf de grandest supper, de grandest songs, de grandest⁠—” but just here <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bruder thought it prudent to pull his big fur cap over his eyes, and make a rush for the stage.</p>
			<p>As if by tacit understanding, Christine’s name had not been mentioned during Dennis’s recovery. But one evening, after the little girls had been put to bed, and the lamp shaded, he sat in the dimly lighted room, looking fixedly for a long time at the glowing embers. His mother was moving quietly about, putting away the tea-things, clearing up after the children’s play; but as she worked she furtively watched him. At last coming to his side she pushed back the hair that seemed so dark in contrast with the thin, white face and said, gently, “You are thinking of Miss Ludolph, Dennis.”</p>
			<p>He had some blood yet, for that was not the glow of the fire that suffused his cheek; but he only answered, quietly, “Yes, mother.”</p>
			<p>“Do you think you can forget her?”</p>
			<p>“I don’t know.”</p>
			<p>“Prayer is a mighty thing, my son.”</p>
			<p>“But perhaps it is not God’s will that I should ever win her,” said Dennis, despondently.</p>
			<p>“Then surely it is not yours, my child.”</p>
			<p>“No, mother,” said Dennis, with bowed head and low tone, “but yet I am human and weak.”</p>
			<p>“You would still wish that it were His will?”</p>
			<p>“Yes; I could not help it.”</p>
			<p>“But you would submit?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, with His help I would,” firmly.</p>
			<p>“That is sufficient, my boy; I have such confidence in God that I know this matter will result in a way to secure you the greatest happiness in the end.”</p>
			<p>But after a little time he sighed, wearily, “Yet how hard it is to wait till the great plan is worked out!”</p>
			<p>Solemnly she quoted⁠—“God will render to every man according to his deeds. To them who by patient continuance in well-doing seek for glory and honor and immortality, eternal life.”</p>
			<p>Braced by the stirring words of inspiration, strengthened by his mother’s faith, he looked up after a moment and said, earnestly, “At any rate I will try to be a <em>man in your sense of the word</em>, and that is saying a great deal.”</p>
			<p>She beamed at him through her spectacles over her knitting-needles; and he thought, as he gazed fondly at her, that in spite of her quaint, old-fashioned garb, and homely occupation, she appeared more truly a saint than any painted on cathedral windows.</p>
			<p>He soon noticed that his mother had grown feeble, and he determined to take her with him on his return, believing that, by his care, and the wise use of tonics, he could restore her to her wonted strength. His increased salary now justified the step.</p>
			<p>Early in November his physician said he might return to business if he would be prudent. He gladly availed himself of the permission, for he longed to be employed again.</p>
			<p>The clerks all welcomed him warmly, for his good-nature had disarmed jealousy at his rapid rise. But in the greeting of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ludolph he missed something of the cordiality he expected.</p>
			<p>“Perhaps she has told him,” thought he; and at once his own manner became tinged with a certain coldness and dignity. He determined that both father and daughter should think of him only with respect.</p>
			<p>At the Bruders’ the millennium came with Dennis. Metaphorically the fatted calf was killed; their plain little room was trimmed with evergreens, and when he entered he was greeted by such a jubilant, triumphant chorus of welcomes as almost took away his breath. What little he had left was suddenly squeezed out of him; for <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bruden, dropping her frying-pan and dish-cloth, rushed upon him, exclaiming, “Ah! mine fren! mine fren! De goot Gott be praised;” and she gave him an embrace that made his bones ache.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bruder stalked about the room repeating with explosive energy, like minute-guns, “Praise Gott! Praise Gott!” Ernst, his great eyes dimmed with happy tears, clung to Dennis’s hand, as if he would make sure, by sense of touch as well as sight, that he had regained his beloved teacher. The little Bruders were equally jubilant, though from rather mixed motives. Dennis’s arrival was very well, but they could not keep their round eyes long off the preparations for such a supper as never before had blessed their brief career.</p>
			<p>“Truly,” thought Dennis, as he looked around upon the happy family, and contrasted its appearance with that which it had presented when he first saw it, “my small investment of kindness and effort in this case has returned large interest. I think it pays to do good.”</p>
			<p>The evening was one of almost unmingled happiness, even to his sore, disappointed heart, and passed into memory as among the sunniest places of his life.</p>
			<p>He found a pleasant little cottage over on the West side, part of which he rented for his mother and sisters.</p>
			<p>With <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ludolph’s permission he went after them, and installed them in it. Thus he had what he had needed all along⁠—a home, a resting-place for body and soul, under the watchful eye of love.</p>
			<p>About this time <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Arten met him, stared a moment, then clapped him on the back in his hearty way, saying, “Well, well, young man! you have cause to be thankful, and not to the doctors, either.”</p>
			<p>“I think I am,” said Dennis, smiling.</p>
			<p>Suddenly the doctor looked grave, and asked in a stern voice, “Are you a heathen, or a good Christian?”</p>
			<p>“I hope not the former,” replied Dennis, a little startled.</p>
			<p>“Then don’t go and commit suicide again. Don’t you know flesh and blood can only stand so much? When an intelligent young fellow like you goes beyond that, he is committing suicide. Bless your soul, my ambitious friend, the ten commandments ain’t all the law of God. His laws are also written all over this long body of yours, and you came near paying a pretty penalty for breaking them. You won’t get off the second time.”</p>
			<p>“You are right, doctor; I now see that I acted very wrongly.”</p>
			<p>“ ‘Bring forth fruits meet for repentance.’ I am rich enough to give sound advice,” said the brusque old physician, passing on.</p>
			<p>“Stop a moment, doctor,” cried Dennis, “I want you to see my mother.”</p>
			<p>“What is the matter with her? She been breaking the commandments, too?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, no!” exclaimed Dennis. “She is not a bit of a heathen.”</p>
			<p>“I am not so sure about that. I know many eminent saints in the church who will eat lobster salad for supper, and then send for the doctor and minister before morning. There is a precious twaddle about ‘mysterious Providence.’ Providence isn’t half so mysterious as people make out. The doctor is expected to look serious and sympathetic, and call their law-breaking and its penalty by some outlandish Latin name that no one can understand. I give ’em the square truth, and tell ’em they’ve been breaking the commandments.”</p>
			<p>Dennis could not forbear smiling at the doctor’s rough handling of humbug, even in one of its most respectable guises. Then, remembering his mother, he added, gravely: “I am truly anxious about my mother, she has grown so feeble. I want, and yet dread, the truth.”</p>
			<p>The bantering manner of the good old doctor changed at once, and he said, kindly, “I’ll come, my boy, within a few days, though I am nearly run off my feet.”</p>
			<p>He went off, muttering, “Why don’t the people send for some of the youngsters that sit kicking up their heels in their offices all day?”</p>
			<p>Dennis soon fell into the routine of work and rapidly grew stronger. But his face had acquired a gravity, a something in expression that only experience gives, which made him appear older by ten years. All trace of the boy had gone, and his countenance was now that of the man, and of one who had suffered.</p>
			<p>As soon as he recovered sufficient strength to act with decision, he indignantly tried to banish Christine’s image from his memory. But he found this impossible. Though at times his eyes would flash, in view of her treatment, they would soon grow gentle and tender, and he found himself excusing and extenuating, by the most special pleadings, that which he had justly condemned.</p>
			<p>One evening his mother startled him out of a long revery, in which he had almost vindicated Christine, by saying, “A very pleasant smile has been gradually dawning on your face, my son.”</p>
			<p>“Mother,” replied he, hesitatingly, “perhaps I have judged Miss Ludolph harshly.”</p>
			<p>“Your love, not your reason, has evidently been pleading for her.”</p>
			<p>“Well, mother, I suppose you are right.”</p>
			<p>“So I suppose the Divine love pleads for the weak and sinful,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fleet, dreamily.</p>
			<p>“That is a very pleasant thought, mother, for sometimes it seems that my love could make black white.”</p>
			<p>“That the Divine love has done, but at infinite cost to itself.”</p>
			<p>“Oh that my love at any cost to itself could lead her into the new life of the believer!” said Dennis, in a low, earnest tone.</p>
			<p>“Your love is like the Divine in being unselfish, but remember the vital differences and take heed. God <em>can</em> change the nature of the imperfect creature that He loves. You cannot. His love is infinite in its strength and patience. You are human. The proud, selfish, unbelieving Miss Ludolph (pardon mother’s plain words) could not make you happy. To the degree that you were loyal to God, you would be unhappy, and I should surely dread such a union. The whole tone of your moral character would have to be greatly lowered to permit even peace.”</p>
			<p>“But, mother,” said Dennis, almost impatiently, “in view of my unconquerable love, it is nearly the same as if I were married to her now.”</p>
			<p>“No, my son, I think not. I know your pretty theory on this subject, but it seems more pretty than true. Marriage makes a vital difference. It is the closest union that we can voluntarily form on earth, and is the emblem of the spiritual oneness of the believer’s soul with Christ. We may be led through circumstances, as you have been, to love one with whom we should not form such a union. Indeed, in the true and mystic meaning of the rite, you could not marry Christine Ludolph. The Bible declares that man and wife shall be one. Unless she changes, unless you change (and that God forbid), this could not be. You would be divided, separated in the deepest essentials of your life here, and in every respect hereafter. Again, while God loves every sinful man and woman, He does not take them to His heart till they cry out to Him for strength to abandon the destroying evil He hates. There are no unchanged, unrenewed hearts in heaven.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, mother, how inexorable is your logic!” said Dennis, breathing heavily.</p>
			<p>“Truth in the end is ever more merciful than falsehood,” she answered, gently.</p>
			<p>After a little, he said, with a heavy sigh, “Mother, you are right, and I am very weak and foolish.”</p>
			<p>She looked at him with unutterable tenderness. She could not crush out all hope, and so whispered, as before: “Prayer is mighty, my child. It is not wrong for you to love. It is your duty, as well as privilege, to pray for her. Trust your Heavenly Father, do His will, and He will solve this question in the very best way.”</p>
			<p>Dennis turned to his mother in sudden and passionate earnestness, and said: “Your prayers are mighty, mother, I truly believe. Oh, pray for her⁠—for my sake as well as hers. Looking from the human side, I am hopeless. It is only God’s almighty power that can make us, as you say, truly one. I fear that now she is only a heartless, fashionable girl. Yet, if she is only this, I do not see how I came to love her as I do. But my trust now is in your prayers to God.”</p>
			<p>“And in your own also: the great Father loves you, too, my son. If He chooses that the dross in her character should be burned away, and your two lives fused, there are in His providence just the fiery trials, just the circumstances that will bring it about.” (Was she unconsciously uttering a prophecy?) “The crucible of affliction, the test of some great emergency, will often develop a seemingly weak and frivolous girl into noble life, where there is real gold of latent worth to be acted on.”</p>
			<p>“Christine Ludolph is anything but weak and frivolous,” said he. “Her character is strong, and I think most decided in its present bent. But as you say, if the Divine Alchemist wills it, He can change even the dross to gold, and turn unbelief to faith.”</p>
			<p>Hope, Christine! There is light coming, though as yet you cannot see it. There are angels of mercy flying toward you, though you cannot hear the rustle of their wings. The dark curtain of death and despair can never shut down upon a life linked to heaven by such true, strong prayer. And yet the logical results of wrong-doing will work themselves out, sin must be punished and faith sorely tried.</p>
			<p>Dennis heard incidentally that Christine was absent on a visit to New York, but he knew nothing of the time of her return.</p>
			<p>He now bent himself steadily and resolutely to the mastering of his business, and under <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bruder’s direction resumed his art studies, though now in such moderation as <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Arten would commend.</p>
			<p>He also entered on an artistic effort that would tax his powers and genius to the very utmost, of which more anon.</p>
			<p>By the time Christine returned, he was quite himself again, though much paler and thinner than when he first entered the store.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>After Christine had been at home nearly a week, her father, to rouse her out of her listlessness, said one morning: “We have recently received quite a remarkable painting from Europe. You will find it in the upper show-room, and had better come down to-day to see it, for it may be sold soon. I think you would like to copy one or two figures in it.”</p>
			<p>The lassitude from her New York dissipation was passing away, and her active nature beginning to assert itself again. She started up and said, “Wait five minutes and I will get sketching materials and go down with you.”</p>
			<p>By reason of her interdict, made at West Point, so earnestly, and indeed fiercely, and confirmed by her manner, her father had never mentioned the name of Dennis Fleet. The very fact that no one had spoken of him since that dreadful day when tidings came in on every side that he could not live was confirmation in her mind that he was dead.</p>
			<p>She dreaded going to the store, especially for the first time, for everything would irresistibly remind her of him whom she could not think of now without a pang. But as the ordeal must come, why, the sooner it was over the better. So a few moments later her hand was on her father’s arm, and they were on their way to the Art Building as in happier days.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ludolph went to his office, and Christine, looking neither to the right nor to the left, ascended to the upper show-room, and at once sought to engage every faculty in making the sketch her father had suggested. Since Dennis was not, as she believed, either on the earth or elsewhere, she tried to take up life again as it had been before he came, and to act as if he had never been.</p>
			<p>Hopeless task! In that familiar place, where they had begun the rearrangement of the store, everything spoke of him. She saw his glowing cheeks; again his dark, eager eyes followed her every movement and interpreted her wishes even before she could speak. Some of the pictures on the walls his hands had handled, and in her strong fancy his lithe form seemed moving the ladder to take them down again, while she, with heart and mind at rest, looked with growing curiosity and interest on her humble helper.</p>
			<p>What changes had occurred within a short half-year! She shuddered at the thought that one who was then so instinct with life and happiness could now be dust and nothingness, and she the cause.</p>
			<p>Association and conscience were again too powerful. She was becoming nervous and full of a strange unrest, so she concluded to finish her sketch at another time. As she was gathering up her materials she heard some one enter the room.</p>
			<p>She was in such a morbid, unstrung state that the least thing startled her. But imagine if you can her wonder and terror as she saw Dennis Fleet⁠—the dead and buried, as she fully believed⁠—enter, carrying a picture as of old, and looking as of old, save that he was paler and thinner. Was it an apparition? or, as she had read, had she dwelt so long on this trouble that her mind and imagination were becoming disordered and able to place their wild creations before her as realities?</p>
			<p>Her sketching materials fell clattering to the floor, and after one sharp exclamation of alarm she stood as if transfixed, with parted lips and dilated eyes, panting like a frightened bird.</p>
			<p>If a sculptor had wished to portray the form and attitude of one startled by the supernatural, never could he have found a more fitting model than Christine at this moment.</p>
			<p>As she had been seated a little on one side Dennis had not seen her at first; but, on recognizing her so unexpectedly, he was scarcely less startled than she, and the valuable picture he was carrying nearly met sudden destruction. But he had no such reason as Christine for the continuance of his surprise, and, at once recovering himself, he set the picture against the wall.</p>
			<p>This made the illusion still more strange and terrible to Christine. There was the dead before her, doing just as she had been imagining⁠—just what he had done at her bidding months before.</p>
			<p>Dennis was greatly puzzled by her look of alarm and distress. Then he thought that perhaps she feared he would break out in bitter and angry invectives again, and he advanced toward her to assure her of the contrary.</p>
			<p>Slowly and instinctively she retreated and put up her hands with a deprecatory gesture.</p>
			<p>“She cannot endure the sight of me,” thought he, but at once he said, with dignified courtesy: “Miss Ludolph, you have nothing to fear from me, that you should regard me in that manner. You need not shrink as if from contagion. We can treat each other as courteous strangers, at least.”</p>
			<p>“I⁠—I⁠—I⁠—thought you were dead!” she gasped, in a loud whisper.</p>
			<p>Dennis’s cheek grew paler than it had been in all his sickness, and then as suddenly became dark with anger. His eyes were terrible in their indignation as he advanced a few paces almost fiercely. She trembled violently and shrunk further away.</p>
			<p>“You thought I was dead?” he asked, sternly.</p>
			<p>“Ye-e-s,” in the same unnatural whisper.</p>
			<p>“What!” he exclaimed, in short and bitter emphasis, “do you mean to say that you never cared even to ask whether I lived or died in my long, weary illness?⁠—that you were so supremely indifferent to my fate that you could not articulate one sentence of inquiry? Surely this is the very sublimity of heartlessness; this is to be callous beyond one’s power of imagination. It seems to me that I would feel as much interest as that in any human being I had once known. If even a dog had licked my hand in good-will, and afterward I had seen it, wounded or sick, creep off into covert, the next time I passed that way I would step aside to see whether the poor creature had lived or died. But after all the wealth of affection that I lavished upon you, after toiling and almost dying in my vain effort to touch your marble heart, you have not even the humanity to ask if I am above ground!”</p>
			<p>The illusion had now passed from Christine’s mind, and with it her alarm. The true state of the case was rapidly dawning upon her, and she was about to speak eagerly; but in his strong indignation he continued, impetuously: “You thought I was dead! The wish probably was father to the thought. My presumption deserved no better fate. But permit me to tell you, though all unbidden, I did not die. With God’s blessing I expect to live to a good old age, and intend that but few years shall pass before my name is as well known and honored as the ancient one of Ludolph;” and he turned on his heel and strode from the room.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
