<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XLIV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-44" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIV</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">On the Beach</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>In the situation of supreme peril described in the last chapter, Dennis stood a second helpless and hopeless. Christine rested a heavy burden in his arms, happily unconscious. Breathing an agonized prayer to heaven, he looked around for any possibility of escape. Just then an express-wagon was driven furiously toward them, its driver seeking his way out by the same path that Dennis had chosen. As he reached them the man saw the hopeless obstruction, and wheeled his horses. As he did so, quick as thought, Dennis threw Christine into the bottom of the wagon, and, clinging to it, climbed into it himself. He turned her face downward from the fire, and, covering his own, he crouched beside her, trusting all now to God.</p>
			<p>The driver urged his horses toward the lake, believing that his only chance. They tore away through the blazing streets. The poor man was soon swept from his seat and perished, but his horses rushed madly on till they plunged into the lake.</p>
			<p>At the sound of water Dennis lifted his head and gave a cry of joy. It seemed that the hand of God had snatched them from death. Gently he lifted Christine out upon the sands and commenced bathing her face from the water that broke in spray at his feet. She soon revived and looked around. In a voice full of awe and wonder she whispered, “Ah! there is another world and another life, after all.”</p>
			<p>“Indeed there is, Miss Ludolph,” said Dennis, supporting her on his arm and bending over her, “but, thanks to a merciful Providence, you are still in this one.”</p>
			<p>“How is it?” she said, with a bewildered air. “I do not understand. The last I remember, we were surrounded by fire, you were despairing, and it seemed that I died.”</p>
			<p>“You fainted, Miss Ludolph. But God as by a miracle brought us out of the furnace, and for the present we are safe.” After she had sufficiently rallied from her excessive exhaustion and terror, he told her how they escaped.</p>
			<p>“I see no God in it all,” she said; “only a most fortunate opportunity, of which you, with great nerve and presence of mind, availed yourself. To you alone, again and again this dreadful night, I owe my life.”</p>
			<p>“God uses us as His instruments to do His will. The light will come to you by and by, and you will learn a better wisdom.”</p>
			<p>“In this awful conflagration the light has come. On every side I see as in letters of fire, ‘There is no God.’ If it were otherwise these scenes would be impossible. And any being permitting or causing the evils and crimes this dreadful night has witnessed, I shall fear and hate beyond the power of language to express.”</p>
			<p>She uttered these words sitting on the sands with multitudes of others, her face (from which Dennis had washed the dust and smoke) looking in the glare so wan and white that he feared, with a sickening dread, that through exposure, terror, or some of the many dangers by which they were surrounded, she might pass into the future world with all her unbelief and spiritual darkness. He yearned over her with a solicitude and pity that he could not express. She seemed so near⁠—indeed he could feel her form tremble, as she kneeled beside her, and supported her by his arm⁠—and yet, in view of her faithless state, how widely were they separated! Should anyone of the many perils about them quench the little candle of her life, which even now flickered faintly, where in the wide universe could he hope to meet her again? God can no doubt console His children and make up to them every loss, but the passionate heart, with its intense human love, clings to its idol none the less. Dennis saw that the fire would probably hem them in on the beach for the remainder of the night and the following day. He determined therefore in every way possible to beguile the weary, perilous hours, and, if she would permit it, to lead her thoughts heavenward. Hence arose from time to time conversations, to which, with joy, he found Christine no longer averse. Indeed, she often introduced them.</p>
			<p>Chafing her hands, he said in accents of the deepest sympathy, “How I pity you, Miss Ludolph! It must indeed be terrible to possess your thoughtful mind, to realize these scenes so keenly, and yet have no faith in a Divine Friend. I cannot explain to you the mystery of evil⁠—why it came, or why it exists. Who can? I am but one of God’s little children, and only know with certainty that my Heavenly Father loves and will take care of me.”</p>
			<p>“How do you know it?” she asked, eagerly.</p>
			<p>“In several ways. Mainly because I feel it.”</p>
			<p>“It all seems so vague and unreal,” she sighed, dreamily. “There is nothing certain, assured. There is no test by which I can at once know the truth.”</p>
			<p>“That does not prevent the truth from existing. That some are blind is no proof that color does not exist.”</p>
			<p>“But how can you be sure there is a God? You never saw Him.”</p>
			<p>“I do not see the heat that scorches us, but I feel it, and know it exists.”</p>
			<p>“But I feel the heat the same as yourself, and I have no consciousness of a Divine Being.”</p>
			<p>“That does not take away my consciousness that He is my Saviour and Friend. As yet you are spiritually dead. If you were physically dead, you would not feel the heat of this fire.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, it is all mystery⁠—darkness,” she cried, piteously.</p>
			<p>The sun had now risen quite above the waters of the lake, but seen through the lurid smoke which swept over its face, it seemed like one of the great red cinders that were continually sailing over their heads. In the frightful glare, the transition from night to day had scarcely been noted. The long, narrow beach was occupied by thousands of fugitives, who were hemmed in on every side. On the south was the river, skirted with fire, while opposite, on the west, the heat was almost intolerable; on the east were the cold waves of the lake, and on the north a burning pier that they could not cross. Their only hope was to cling to that narrow line where fire and water mingled, and with one element to fight the other. Here again was seen the mingling of all classes which the streets and every place of refuge witnessed. Judges, physicians, statesmen, clergymen, bankers, were jostled by roughs and thieves. The laborer sat on the sand with his family, side by side with the millionaire and his household. The poor debauched woman of the town moaned and shivered in her scant clothing, at a slight remove from the most refined Christian lady. In the unparalleled disaster, all social distinctions were lost, levelled like the beach on which the fugitives cowered. From some groups was heard the voice of prayer; from others, bitter wailings and passionate cries for lost members of the family; others had saved quantities of vile whiskey, if nothing else, and made the scene more ghastly by orgies that seemed not of earth. Added to the liquor were the mad excitement and recklessness which often seize the depraved classes on such occasions. They committed excesses that cannot be mentioned-these drunken, howling, fighting wretches. Obscene epithets and words fell around like blows. And yet all were so occupied with their own misfortunes, sufferings, and danger, as scarcely to heed their neighbors, unless these became very violent.</p>
			<p>Upon this heterogeneous mass of humanity the fire rained down almost as we imagine it to have fallen upon the doomed cities of the plain, and the hot breath of the flames scorched the exposed cheek and crisped even eyebrows and hair. Sparks, flakes, cinders, pieces of roof, and fiery pebbles seemed to fill the air, and often cries and shrieks announced that furniture and bedding which had been dragged thither, and even the clothing of women and children, were burning. Added to all the other terrors of the scene was the presence of large numbers of horses and cattle, snorting and plunging in their fright and pain.</p>
			<p>But the sound that smote Dennis’s heart with the deepest commiseration was the continuous wail of helpless little children, many of them utterly separated from parents and friends, and in the very agony of fear.</p>
			<p>He greatly dreaded the effect of these upon Christine, knowing how, in the luxurious past, she had been shielded from every rough experience. But she at length rallied into something like composure. Her constitution was elastic and full of vitality, and after escaping from immediate danger she again began to hope. Moreover, to a degree that even she could not understand, his presence was a source of strength and courage, and her heart clung to him with desperate earnestness, believing him the sole barrier against immediate death, and (what she dreaded scarcely less) a lonely, wretched existence, should her life be spared.</p>
			<p>Though he never lost sight of her for a moment, and kept continually wetting her hair and person, he found time to render assistance to others, and, by carrying his hat full of water here and there, extinguished many a dangerous spark. He also, again and again, snatched up little children from under the trampling hoofs of frightened horses.</p>
			<p>As she watched him, so self-forgetful and fearless, she realized more and more vividly that he was sustained and animated by some mighty principle that she knew nothing of, and could not understand. The impression grew upon her that he was right and she wrong. Though it all remained in mystery and doubt, she could not resist the logic of true Christian action.</p>
			<p>But as the day advanced the flames grew hotter, and their breath more withering. About noon Dennis noticed that some shanties on the sand near them were in danger of catching fire and perilling all in that vicinity. Therefore he said, “Miss Ludolph, stay here where I leave you for a little time, so that I may know just where to find you.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, do not leave me!” she pleaded: “I have no one in the wide world to help me except you.”</p>
			<p>“I shall not be beyond call. You see those shanties there; if possible we must keep them from burning, or the fire will come too near for safety.” Then, starting forward, he cried, “Who will volunteer to keep the fire back? All must see that if those buildings burn we shall be in danger.”</p>
			<p>Several men stepped forward, and with hats and anything that would hold water they began to wet the old rookeries. But the fiery storm swooped steadily down on them, and their efforts were as futile as if they had tried to beat back the wind. Suddenly a mass of flame leaped upon the buildings, and in a moment they were all ablaze.</p>
			<p>“Into the lake, quick!” cried Dennis, and all rushed for the cool waters.</p>
			<p>Lifting Christine from the sand, and passing his arm around her trembling, shivering form, he plunged through the breakers, and the crowd pressed after him. Indeed they pushed him so far out in the cold waves that he nearly lost his footing, and for a few moments Christine lost hers altogether, and added her cries to those of the terror-stricken multitude. But pushing in a little nearer the shore, he held her firmly and said with the confidence that again inspired hope: “Courage, Miss Ludolph. With God’s help I will save you yet.”</p>
			<p>Even as she clung to him in the water, she looked into his face. He was regarding her so kindly, so pitifully, that a great and generous impulse, the richest, ripest fruit of her human love, throbbed at her heart, and faltered from her lips⁠—“<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fleet, I am not worthy of this risk on your part. If you will leave me you can save your own life, and your life is worth so much more than mine!”</p>
			<p>True and deep must have been the affection that could lead Christine Ludolph to say such words to any human being. There was a time when, in her creed, all the world existed but to minister to her. But she was not sorry to see the look of pained surprise which came into Dennis’s face and to hear him say, very sadly: “Miss Ludolph, I did not imagine that you could think me capable of that. I had the good fortune to rescue Miss Brown last night, at greater peril than this, and do you think I would leave you?”</p>
			<p>“You are a true knight, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fleet,” she said, humbly, “and the need or danger of every defenceless woman is alike a sacred claim upon you.”</p>
			<p>Dennis was about to intimate that, though this was true in knightly creed, still among all the women in the world there might be a preference, when a score of horses, driven before the fire, and goaded by the burning cinders, rushed down the beach, into the water, right among the human fugitives.</p>
			<p>Again went up the cry of agony and terror. Some were no doubt stricken down not to rise again. In the melee Dennis pushed out into deeper water, where the frantic animals could not plunge upon him. A child floated near, and he snatched it up. As soon as the poor brutes became quiet, clasping Christine with his right arm and holding up the child with the other, he waded into shallow water.</p>
			<p>The peril was now perhaps at its height, and all were obliged to wet their heads, to keep even their hair from singeing. Those on the beach threw water on each other without cessation. Many a choice bit of property⁠—it might be a piano, or an express-wagon loaded with the richest furs and driven to the beach as a place of fancied security⁠—now caught fire, and added to the heat and consternation.</p>
			<p>When this hour of extreme danger had passed, standing with the cold billows of the lake breaking round him, and the billows of fire still rolling overhead, Dennis began to sing in his loud, clear voice:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
				<p>
					<span>“Jesus, lover of my soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let me to thy bosom fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While the billows near me roll,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While the tempest still is high.”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Voice after voice joined in, some loud and strong, but others weak and trembling⁠—the pitiful cry of poor terror-stricken women to the only One who it seemed could help them in their bitter extremity. Never before were those beautiful words sung in such accents of clinging, touching faith. Its sweet cadence was heard above the roar of the flames and the breakers.</p>
			<p>Christine could only cling weeping to Dennis.</p>
			<p>When the hymn ceased, in harshest discord the voice of a half-drunken man grated on their ears.</p>
			<p>“An’ what in bloody blazes does yer Jasus burn us all up for, I’d like to know. Sure an’ he’s no right to send us to hell before our time.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, hush! hush!” cried a dozen voices, shocked and pained.</p>
			<p>“Divil a bit will I hush, sure; an’ haven’t I as good a right to have me say as that singin’ parson!”</p>
			<p>“You are an Irishman, are you not?” said Dennis, now venturing out of the water.</p>
			<p>“Yis! what have ye got to say agin it?” asked the man, belligerent at once.</p>
			<p>“Did you ever know an Irishman refuse to do what a lady asked of him?”</p>
			<p>“Faith no, and I niver will.”</p>
			<p>“Then this lady, who is sick and suffering, asks you to please keep still, and I will be still also; so that’s fair.”</p>
			<p>The Irishman scratched his head a moment, and said in a quieter tone, “Since ye spake so civil and dacent, I’ll do as ye sez; and here’s to the leddy’s health;” and he finished a bottle of whiskey, which he soon laid him out on the beach.</p>
			<p>“Thank you! Thank you!” said grateful voices on every side.</p>
			<p>Dennis found the mother of the child and gave it to her; and then causing Christine to sit down near the water, where he could easily throw it on her, he stood at her side, vigilant and almost tender in his solicitude. Her tears were falling very fast, and he presently stooped down and said, gently, “Miss Ludolph, I think the worst of the danger is over.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fleet!” she whispered, “dreadful as it may seem to you, the words of that drunken brute there are nearer the language of my heart than those of your sweet hymn. How can a good God permit such creatures and evils to exist?”</p>
			<p>“Again I must say to you,” said Dennis, “that I cannot explain the mystery of evil. But I know this, God is superior to it; He will at last triumph over it. The Bible reveals Him to us as able and as seeking to deliver all who will trust Him and work with Him, and those who venture out upon His promises find them true. Miss Ludolph, this is not merely a matter of theory, argument, and belief. It is more truly a matter of experience. The Bible invites, ‘Oh, taste and see that the Lord is good.’ I have tasted and know He is. I have trusted Him for years, and He never failed me.”</p>
			<p>“You certainly have been sustained throughout this dreadful scene by a principle that I cannot understand, but I would give all the world to possess it.”</p>
			<p>“You may possess it, Miss Ludolph.”</p>
			<p>“How? how?” she asked, eagerly.</p>
			<p>“Do you wish to believe as I do?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, indeed; and yet my heart rebels against a God who permits, even if He does not cause, all this evil.”</p>
			<p>“Does it rebel against a Being who from first to last tries to save men from evil?”</p>
			<p>“Tries! tries! what an expression to apply to a God! Why does He not do it in every case?”</p>
			<p>“Because multitudes will not let Him.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, that is worse still! Surely, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fleet, you let your reason have nothing to do with your faith. How can a poor and weak being like myself prevent an Almighty one from doing what He pleases?”</p>
			<p>“I am stronger than you, Miss Ludolph, and yet I could not have saved you tonight unless you had first trusted me, and then done everything in your power to further my efforts.”</p>
			<p>“But your power is human and limited, and you say God is all-powerful.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, but it is His plan and purpose never to save us against our will. He has made us in His own image and endowed us with reason, conscience, and a will to choose between good and evil. He appeals to these noble faculties from first to last. He has given us hearts, and seeks to win them by revealing His love to us. More than all, His Spirit, present in the world, uses every form of truth in persuading and making us willing to become His true children. So you see that neither on the one hand does God gather us up like driftwood nor does He on the other drag us at His chariot wheels, unwilling captives, as did those who, at various times, have sought to overrun the world by force. God seeks to conquer the world by the might of the truth, by the might of love.”</p>
			<p>Christine was hanging with the most eager interest on his words. Suddenly his eyes, which had expressed such a kindly and almost tender interest in her, blazed with indignation, and he darted up the beach. Turning around she saw, at some little distance, a young woman most scantily clad, clinging desperately to a bundle which a large, coarse man was trying to wrench from her. The wretch, finding that he could not loosen her hold, struck her in the face with such force that she fell stunned upon the ground, and the bundle flew out of her hand. He eagerly snatched it up, believing it to contain jewelry. Before he could escape he was confronted by an unexpected enemy. But Dennis was in a passion, and withal weak and exhausted, while his adversary was cool, and an adept in the pugilistic art. The two men fought savagely, and Christine, forgetting herself in her instinctive desire to help Dennis, was rushing to his side, crying, “If there is a man here worthy of the name, let him strike for the right!” but before she and others could reach the combatants the thief had planted his fist on Dennis’s temple. Though the latter partially parried the blow, it fell with such force as to extend him senseless on the earth. The villain, with a shout of derision, snatched up the bundle and dashed off apparently toward the fire. There was but a feeble attempt made to follow him. Few understood the case, and indeed scenes of violence and terror had become so common that the majority had grown apathetic, save in respect to their personal well-being.</p>
			<p>Christine lifted the pale face, down which the blood was trickling, into her lap, and cried, in a tone of indescribable anguish, “Oh, he is dead! he is dead!”</p>
			<p>“Oh, no, miss; he is not dead, I guess,” said a good-natured voice near. “Let me bring a hatful of water from the lake, and that’ll bring him to.”</p>
			<p>And so it did. Dennis opened his eyes, put his hand to his head, and then looked around. But when he saw Christine bending over him with tearful eyes, and realized how tenderly she had pillowed his aching head, he started up with a deep flush of pleasure, and said: “Do not be alarmed, Miss Ludolph; I was only stunned for a moment. Where is the thief?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, they let him escape,” said Christine, indignantly.</p>
			<p>“Shame!” cried Dennis, regaining his feet rather unsteadily.</p>
			<p>“Wal, stranger, a good many wrongs tonight must go unrighted.”</p>
			<p>The poor girl who had been robbed sat on the sands swaying backing and forth, wringing her hands, and crying that she had lost everything.</p>
			<p>“Well, my poor friend, that is about the case with the most of us. We may be thankful that we have our lives. Here is my coat,” for her shoulders and neck were bare; “and if you will come down to the lake this lady,” pointing to Christine, “will bathe the place where the brute struck you.”</p>
			<p>“Shall I not give up my shawl to some of these poor creatures?” asked Christine.</p>
			<p>“No, Miss Ludolph, I do not know how long we may be kept here; but I fear we shall suffer as much from cold as from heat, and your life might depend upon keeping warm.”</p>
			<p>“I will do whatever you bid me,” she said, looking gratefully at him.</p>
			<p>“That is the way to feel and act toward God,” he said, gently.</p>
			<p>But with sudden impetuosity she answered: “I cannot see what He has just permitted to happen before my eyes. Right has not triumphed, but the foulest wrong.”</p>
			<p>“You do not see the end, Miss Ludolph.”</p>
			<p>“But I must judge from what I see.”</p>
			<p>After she had bathed the poor girl’s face, comforted and reassured her, Dennis took up the conversation again and found Christine eager to listen. Pausing every few moments to throw water over his companion, he said: “Faith is beyond reason, beyond knowledge, though not contrary to them. You are judging as we do not judge about the commonest affairs⁠—from a few isolated, mysterious facts, instead of carefully looking the subject all over. You pass by what is plain and well understood to what is obscure, and from that point seek to understand Christianity. Every science has its obscure points and mysteries, but who begins with those to learn the science? Can you ignore the fact that millions of highly intelligent people, with every motive to know the truth, have satisfied themselves as to the reality of our faith? Our Bible system of truth may contain much that is obscure, even as the starry vault has distances that no eye or telescope can penetrate, and as this little earth has mysteries that science cannot solve, but there is enough known and understood to satisfy us perfectly. Let me assure you, Miss Ludolph, that Christianity rests on broad truths, and is sustained by arguments that no candid mind can resist after patiently considering them.”</p>
			<p>She shook her head, silenced perhaps, but not satisfied.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
